VOLUME I




CHAPTER I


Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home and
happy disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings of
existence; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very
little to distress or vex her.
Her mother had
died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance
of her caresses; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman
as governess, who had fallen little short of a mother in affection.
Between _them_ it was more the intimacy of sisters.
The real evils, indeed, of Emma’s situation were the power of having
rather too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little too
well of herself; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to
her many enjoyments.
Sorrow came—a gentle sorrow—but not at all in the shape of any
disagreeable consciousness.—Miss Taylor married.
It was on the wedding-day of this
beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any
continuance.
The wedding over, and the bride-people gone, her father
and herself were left to dine together, with no prospect of a third to
cheer a long evening.
Her father composed himself to sleep after
dinner, as usual, and she had then only to sit and think of what she
had lost.
The event had every promise of happiness for her friend.
Mr.
Weston was
a man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, and
pleasant manners; and there was some satisfaction in considering with
what self-denying, generous friendship she had always wished and
promoted the match; but it was a black morning’s work for her.
The want
of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day.
She had been a friend and companion such
as few possessed: intelligent, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowing
all the ways of the family, interested in all its concerns, and
peculiarly interested in herself, in every pleasure, every scheme of
hers—one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose, and who had
such an affection for her as could never find fault.
The evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and Mr.
Woodhouse had
not married early) was much increased by his constitution and habits;
for having been a valetudinarian all his life, without activity of mind
or body, he was a much older man in ways than in years; and though
everywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart and his amiable
temper, his talents could not have recommended him at any time.
Highbury, the large and populous village, almost amounting to a town,
to which Hartfield, in spite of its separate lawn, and shrubberies, and
name, did really belong, afforded her no equals.
It was a melancholy change; and Emma could not but
sigh over it, and wish for impossible things, till her father awoke,
and made it necessary to be cheerful.
Matrimony, as the origin of change, was always disagreeable; and he was
by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter’s marrying, nor could
ever speak of her but with compassion, though it had been entirely a
match of affection, when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor
too; and from his habits of gentle selfishness, and of being never able
to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself, he
was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for
herself as for them, and would have been a great deal happier if she
had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield.
Emma smiled and
chatted as cheerfully as she could, to keep him from such thoughts; but
when tea came, it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had
said at dinner,

“Poor Miss Taylor!—I wish she were here again.
What a pity it is that
Mr.
Mr.
Weston is such a
good-humoured, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves a
good wife;—and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for
ever, and bear all my odd humours, when she might have a house of her
own?”

“A house of her own!—But where is the advantage of a house of her own?
Randalls is such a distance.
Weston’s stable, papa.
You know we have
settled all that already.
We talked it all over with Mr.
I only
doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else.
You got Hannah that good place.
Whenever I see her, she always
curtseys and asks me how I do, in a very pretty manner; and when you
have had her here to do needlework, I observe she always turns the lock
of the door the right way and never bangs it.
Whenever James goes
over to see his daughter, you know, she will be hearing of us.
The
backgammon-table was placed; but a visitor immediately afterwards
walked in and made it unnecessary.
He lived
about a mile from Highbury, was a frequent visitor, and always welcome,
and at this time more welcome than usual, as coming directly from their
mutual connexions in London.
He had returned to a late dinner, after
some days’ absence, and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all were
well in Brunswick Square.
It was a happy circumstance, and animated Mr.
Mr.
Knightley had a cheerful manner, which
always did him good; and his many inquiries after “poor Isabella” and
her children were answered most satisfactorily.
When this was over, Mr.
Woodhouse gratefully observed, “It is very kind of you, Mr.
I am afraid you must
have had a shocking walk.”

“Not at all, sir.
Look at my shoes.
Not a speck on them.”

“Well! that is quite surprising, for we have had a vast deal of rain
here.
I wanted them to put off the wedding.”

“By the bye—I have not wished you joy.
Who cried most?”

“Ah! poor Miss Taylor! ’Tis a sad business.”

“Poor Mr. and Miss Woodhouse, if you please; but I cannot possibly say
‘poor Miss Taylor.’ I have a great regard for you and Emma; but when it
comes to the question of dependence or independence!—At any rate, it
must be better to have only one to please than two.”

“Especially when _one_ of those two is such a fanciful, troublesome
creature!” said Emma playfully. “That is what you have in your head, I
know—and what you would certainly say if my father were not by.”

“I believe it is very true, my dear, indeed,” said Mr.
What a horrible idea!
Oh no!
I meant only
myself.
Mr.
Miss Taylor has been used to have two persons
to please; she will now have but one.
The chances are that she must be
a gainer.”

“Well,” said Emma, willing to let it pass—“you want to hear about the
wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, for we all behaved
charmingly.
Every friend of Miss Taylor
must be glad to have her so happily married.”

“And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me,” said Emma, “and a
very considerable one—that I made the match myself.
I made the match,
you know, four years ago; and to have it take place, and be proved in
the right, when so many people said Mr.
Weston would never marry again,
may comfort me for any thing.”

Mr.
Her father fondly replied, “Ah! my
dear, I wish you would not make matches and foretell things, for
whatever you say always comes to pass.
Pray do not make any more
matches.”

“I promise you to make none for myself, papa; but I must, indeed, for
other people.
It is the greatest amusement in the world!
And after such
success, you know!—Every body said that Mr.
Weston would never marry
again.
Oh dear, no!
Mr.
Oh no!
All manner of solemn nonsense was talked on the
subject, but I believed none of it.

“Ever since the day—about four years ago—that Miss Taylor and I met
with him in Broadway Lane, when, because it began to drizzle, he darted
away with so much gallantry, and borrowed two umbrellas for us from
Farmer Mitchell’s, I made up my mind on the subject.
I planned the
match from that hour; and when such success has blessed me in this
instance, dear papa, you cannot think that I shall leave off
match-making.”

“I do not understand what you mean by ‘success,’” said Mr.
Knightley.
“Success supposes endeavour.
Your time has been properly and delicately
spent, if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bring
about this marriage.
But
if, which I rather imagine, your making the match, as you call it,
means only your planning it, your saying to yourself one idle day, ‘I
think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr.
Where is your merit?
What are
you proud of?
I think you must know Hartfield
enough to comprehend that.”

“A straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston, and a rational,
unaffected woman like Miss Taylor, may be safely left to manage their
own concerns.
You are more likely to have done harm to yourself, than
good to them, by interference.”

“Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to others,” rejoined
Mr.
Elton.
Poor Mr.
Elton!
There is nobody in
Highbury who deserves him—and he has been here a whole year, and has
fitted up his house so comfortably, that it would be a shame to have
him single any longer—and I thought when he was joining their hands
to-day, he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same
kind office done for him!
Elton, and this is
the only way I have of doing him a service.”

“Mr.
I dare say Mr.
Knightley,
laughing, “and I agree with you entirely, that it will be a much better
thing.
Weston was a native of Highbury, and born of a respectable family,
which for the last two or three generations had been rising into
gentility and property.
Miss Churchill, however, being of age, and with the full command of her
fortune—though her fortune bore no proportion to the family-estate—was
not to be dissuaded from the marriage, and it took place, to the
infinite mortification of Mr. and Mrs.
Churchill, who threw her off
with due decorum.
Mrs.
The boy
had, with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of his
mother’s, been the means of a sort of reconciliation; and Mr. and Mrs.
A complete change of life became desirable.
He quitted the militia and
engaged in trade, having brothers already established in a good way in
London, which afforded him a favourable opening.
He had still a small house in Highbury,
where most of his leisure days were spent; and between useful
occupation and the pleasures of society, the next eighteen or twenty
years of his life passed cheerfully away.
It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence his
schemes; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth, it
had not shaken his determination of never settling till he could
purchase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls was long looked forward to;
but he had gone steadily on, with these objects in view, till they were
accomplished.
He had made his fortune, bought his house, and obtained
his wife; and was beginning a new period of existence, with every
probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through.
He had
never been an unhappy man; his own temper had secured him from that,
even in his first marriage; but his second must shew him how delightful
a well-judging and truly amiable woman could be, and must give him the
pleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be
chosen, to excite gratitude than to feel it.
He had only himself to please in his choice: his fortune was his own;
for as to Frank, it was more than being tacitly brought up as his
uncle’s heir, it had become so avowed an adoption as to have him assume
the name of Churchill on coming of age.
It was most unlikely,
therefore, that he should ever want his father’s assistance.
His father
had no apprehension of it.
Weston’s nature to
imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear,
and, as he believed, so deservedly dear.
Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury, and a lively
curiosity to see him prevailed, though the compliment was so little
returned that he had never been there in his life.
His coming to visit
his father had been often talked of but never achieved.
There was not
a dissentient voice on the subject, either when Mrs.
Perry drank tea
with Mrs. and Miss Bates, or when Mrs. and Miss Bates returned the
visit.
For a few days, every morning visit in
Highbury included some mention of the handsome letter Mrs.
Frank
Churchill has written to Mrs.
Weston?
Woodhouse told me of it.
Mr.
Woodhouse saw
the letter, and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in his
life.”

It was, indeed, a highly prized letter.
She felt herself a most
fortunate woman; and she had lived long enough to know how fortunate
she might well be thought, where the only regret was for a partial
separation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled, and
who could ill bear to part with her.
She knew that at times she must be missed; and could not think, without
pain, of Emma’s losing a single pleasure, or suffering an hour’s ennui,
from the want of her companionableness: but dear Emma was of no feeble
character; she was more equal to her situation than most girls would
have been, and had sense, and energy, and spirits that might be hoped
would bear her well and happily through its little difficulties and
privations.
Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to Mrs.
But never did she go without Mr.
She would be very glad to stay.”

There was no recovering Miss Taylor—nor much likelihood of ceasing to
pity her; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr.
His own stomach could
bear nothing rich, and he could never believe other people to be
different from himself.
There was a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys being
seen with a slice of Mrs.
Weston’s wedding-cake in their hands: but Mr.
CHAPTER III


Mr.
He had not much
intercourse with any families beyond that circle; his horror of late
hours, and large dinner-parties, made him unfit for any acquaintance
but such as would visit him on his own terms.
Real, long-standing regard brought the Westons and Mr.
Knightley; and
by Mr.
Had it taken place only once a year, it
would have been a grievance.
Bates, the widow of a former vicar of Highbury, was a very old
lady, almost past every thing but tea and quadrille.
Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree
of popularity for a woman neither young, handsome, rich, nor married.
She had never boasted either beauty or cleverness.
It was her own universal
good-will and contented temper which worked such wonders.
She was a great talker upon little matters, which exactly
suited Mr.
Mrs.
She was a plain, motherly kind of woman,
who had worked hard in her youth, and now thought herself entitled to
the occasional holiday of a tea-visit; and having formerly owed much to
Mr.
Weston.
She was delighted to see her father look
comfortable, and very much pleased with herself for contriving things
so well; but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that
every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had
fearfully anticipated.
As she sat one morning, looking forward to exactly such a close of the
present day, a note was brought from Mrs.
Goddard, requesting, in most
respectful terms, to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her; a most
welcome request: for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen, whom Emma knew
very well by sight, and had long felt an interest in, on account of her
beauty.
A very gracious invitation was returned, and the evening no
longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion.
Goddard’s school, and somebody had
lately raised her from the condition of scholar to that of
parlour-boarder.
Encouragement should be given.
The friends from whom she had just parted, though
very good sort of people, must be doing her harm.
They were a family of
the name of Martin, whom Emma well knew by character, as renting a
large farm of Mr.
It
would be an interesting, and certainly a very kind undertaking; highly
becoming her own situation in life, her leisure, and powers.
She was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes, in talking and
listening, and forming all these schemes in the in-betweens, that the
evening flew away at a very unusual rate; and the supper-table, which
always closed such parties, and for which she had been used to sit and
watch the due time, was all set out and ready, and moved forwards to
the fire, before she was aware.
Upon such occasions poor Mr.
He loved to have the cloth laid, because it had been the fashion of his
youth, but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him
rather sorry to see any thing put on it; and while his hospitality
would have welcomed his visitors to every thing, his care for their
health made him grieve that they would eat.
Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all that he
could, with thorough self-approbation, recommend; though he might
constrain himself, while the ladies were comfortably clearing the nicer
things, to say:

“Mrs.
Bates, let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs.
I would not recommend an egg boiled by any body
else; but you need not be afraid, they are very small, you see—one of
our small eggs will not hurt you.
You
need not be afraid of unwholesome preserves here.
Mrs.
Goddard, what say you to _half_ a glass of wine?
The happiness of Miss Smith was
quite equal to her intentions.
Miss Woodhouse was so great a personage
in Highbury, that the prospect of the introduction had given as much
panic as pleasure; but the humble, grateful little girl went off with
highly gratified feelings, delighted with the affability with which
Miss Woodhouse had treated her all the evening, and actually shaken
hands with her at last!
CHAPTER IV


Harriet Smith’s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing.
Quick
and decided in her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, encouraging,
and telling her to come very often; and as their acquaintance
increased, so did their satisfaction in each other.
Her father never
went beyond the shrubbery, where two divisions of the ground sufficed
him for his long walk, or his short, as the year varied; and since Mrs.
Weston’s marriage her exercise had been too much confined.
She had
ventured once alone to Randalls, but it was not pleasant; and a Harriet
Smith, therefore, one whom she could summon at any time to a walk,
would be a valuable addition to her privileges.
But in every respect,
as she saw more of her, she approved her, and was confirmed in all her
kind designs.
Harriet certainly was not clever, but she had a sweet, docile, grateful
disposition, was totally free from conceit, and only desiring to be
guided by any one she looked up to.
Her early attachment to herself was
very amiable; and her inclination for good company, and power of
appreciating what was elegant and clever, shewed that there was no want
of taste, though strength of understanding must not be expected.
Two such could
never be granted.
Two such she did not want.
It was quite a different
sort of thing, a sentiment distinct and independent.
Harriet would be loved as one to whom she could be useful.
Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who
were the parents, but Harriet could not tell.
Goddard, and the teachers, and the girls and the affairs of the
school in general, formed naturally a great part of the
conversation—and but for her acquaintance with the Martins of
Abbey-Mill Farm, it must have been the whole.
But the Martins occupied
her thoughts a good deal; she had spent two very happy months with
them, and now loved to talk of the pleasures of her visit, and describe
the many comforts and wonders of the place.
Martin’s having “_two_ parlours, two very good
parlours, indeed; one of them quite as large as Mrs.
Goddard’s
drawing-room; and of her having an upper maid who had lived
five-and-twenty years with her; and of their having eight cows, two of
them Alderneys, and one a little Welch cow, a very pretty little Welch
cow indeed; and of Mrs.
Martin, who bore a part in the narrative, and was
always mentioned with approbation for his great good-nature in doing
something or other, was a single man; that there was no young Mrs.
With this inspiriting notion, her questions increased in number and
meaning; and she particularly led Harriet to talk more of Mr.
Martin,
and there was evidently no dislike to it.
She was very fond of singing.
He could sing a little himself.
She
believed he was very clever, and understood every thing.
He had a very
fine flock, and, while she was with them, he had been bid more for his
wool than any body in the country.
His mother and sisters were very fond of him.
Martin had
told her one day (and there was a blush as she said it,) that it was
impossible for any body to be a better son, and therefore she was sure,
whenever he married, he would make a good husband.
Not that she
_wanted_ him to marry.
Martin!” thought Emma. “You know what you are about.”

“And when she had come away, Mrs.
Mrs.
Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information beyond the line of
his own business?
He does not read?”

“Oh yes!—that is, no—I do not know—but I believe he has read a good
deal—but not what you would think any thing of.
He reads the
Agricultural Reports, and some other books that lay in one of the
window seats—but he reads all _them_ to himself.
But sometimes of an
evening, before we went to cards, he would read something aloud out of
the Elegant Extracts, very entertaining.
Martin?”

“Oh! not handsome—not at all handsome.
I thought him very plain at
first, but I do not think him so plain now.
He has passed you very often.”

“That may be, and I may have seen him fifty times, but without having
any idea of his name.
A degree or two lower, and a creditable appearance might interest
me; I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other.
But a farmer can need none of my help, and is, therefore, in one sense,
as much above my notice as in every other he is below it.”

“To be sure.
Oh yes!
That is too young to settle.
They seem very comfortable as
they are, and if she were to take any pains to marry him, she would
probably repent it.
Martin, I imagine, has his fortune
entirely to make—cannot be at all beforehand with the world.
But they live very comfortably.
But while I visit at Hartfield,
and you are so kind to me, Miss Woodhouse, I am not afraid of what any
body can do.”

“You understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet; but I
would have you so firmly established in good society, as to be
independent even of Hartfield and Miss Woodhouse.
I want to see you
permanently well connected, and to that end it will be advisable to
have as few odd acquaintance as may be; and, therefore, I say that if
you should still be in this country when Mr.
Martin marries, I wish you
may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters, to be acquainted
with the wife, who will probably be some mere farmer’s daughter,
without education.”

“To be sure.
Yes.
Martin would ever marry any body
but what had had some education—and been very well brought up.
However,
I do not mean to set up my opinion against yours—and I am sure I shall
not wish for the acquaintance of his wife.
They met Mr.
He was on foot, and after looking very respectfully at
her, looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion.
Emma was
not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey; and walking a few
yards forward, while they talked together, soon made her quick eye
sufficiently acquainted with Mr.
Robert Martin.
Mr.
Martin looked as if he did not know what manner was.
They remained but a few minutes together, as Miss Woodhouse must not be
kept waiting; and Harriet then came running to her with a smiling face,
and in a flutter of spirits, which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon to
compose.

“Only think of our happening to meet him!—How very odd!
He did not
think we ever walked this road.
He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet.
He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot
it, but he goes again to-morrow.
So very odd we should happen to meet!
Well, Miss Woodhouse, is he like what you expected?
What do you think
of him?
I had no right to expect
much, and I did not expect much; but I had no idea that he could be so
very clownish, so totally without air.
At
Hartfield, you have had very good specimens of well educated, well bred
men.
I am sure you must have been struck by his awkward
look and abrupt manner, and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard to
be wholly unmodulated as I stood here.”

“Certainly, he is not like Mr.
I see the difference plain enough.
You might not see one in a hundred with
_gentleman_ so plainly written as in Mr.
Knightley.
But he is not the
only gentleman you have been lately used to.
What say you to Mr.
Weston
and Mr.
Martin with either of _them_.
Compare their
manner of carrying themselves; of walking; of speaking; of being
silent.
Weston is almost an old
man.
Mr.
The older a person
grows, Harriet, the more important it is that their manners should not
be bad; the more glaring and disgusting any loudness, or coarseness, or
awkwardness becomes.
Mr.
Martin is now awkward and abrupt; what will he be at Mr.
He will be a completely gross,
vulgar farmer, totally inattentive to appearances, and thinking of
nothing but profit and loss.”

“Will he, indeed?
What has he to
do with books?
And I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive, and be a very
rich man in time—and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturb
_us_.”

“I wonder he did not remember the book”—was all Harriet’s answer, and
spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma thought might be
safely left to itself.
She, therefore, said no more for some time.
Her
next beginning was,

“In one respect, perhaps, Mr.
Elton’s manners are superior to Mr.
Weston’s.
They have more gentleness.
Weston, which every body likes in _him_,
because there is so much good-humour with it—but that would not do to
be copied.
Neither would Mr.
Knightley’s downright, decided, commanding
sort of manner, though it suits _him_ very well; his figure, and look,
and situation in life seem to allow it; but if any young man were to
set about copying him, he would not be sufferable.
On the contrary, I
think a young man might be very safely recommended to take Mr.
Mr.
He
seems to me to be grown particularly gentle of late.
I do not know
whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with either of us,
Harriet, by additional softness, but it strikes me that his manners are
softer than they used to be.
If he means any thing, it must be to
please you.
Elton very agreeable.
Mr.
Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the young
farmer out of Harriet’s head.
She thought it would be an excellent
match; and only too palpably desirable, natural, and probable, for her
to have much merit in planning it.
The longer she considered it, the greater was her sense of
its expediency.
Elton’s situation was most suitable, quite the
gentleman himself, and without low connexions; at the same time, not of
any family that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet.
He was reckoned
very handsome; his person much admired in general, though not by her,
there being a want of elegance of feature which she could not dispense
with:—but the girl who could be gratified by a Robert Martin’s riding
about the country to get walnuts for her might very well be conquered
by Mr.
Elton’s admiration.
Weston,” said Mr.
Emma must do Harriet good: and by supplying her with
a new object of interest, Harriet may be said to do Emma good.
This
will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma, Mr.
Weston would undoubtedly support me, if he were here, for he
thinks exactly as I do on the subject.
Knightley, I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case.
You
are so much used to live alone, that you do not know the value of a
companion; and, perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a
woman feels in the society of one of her own sex, after being used to
it all her life.
I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith.
She is
not the superior young woman which Emma’s friend ought to be.
They will read together.
I have seen a great many lists of her drawing-up at various times
of books that she meant to read regularly through—and very good lists
they were—very well chosen, and very neatly arranged—sometimes
alphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule.
The list she drew up
when only fourteen—I remember thinking it did her judgment so much
credit, that I preserved it some time; and I dare say she may have made
out a very good list now.
But I have done with expecting any course of
steady reading from Emma.
Weston, smiling, “that I thought so
_then_;—but since we have parted, I can never remember Emma’s omitting
to do any thing I wished.”

“There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as _that_,”—said
Mr.
Knightley, feelingly; and for a moment or two he had done. “But I,”
he soon added, “who have had no such charm thrown over my senses, must
still see, hear, and remember.
Emma is spoiled by being the cleverest
of her family.
And ever since
she was twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all.
She inherits
her mother’s talents, and must have been under subjection to her.”

“I should have been sorry, Mr.
Woodhouse’s family and wanted another
situation; I do not think you would have spoken a good word for me to
any body.
But you were preparing yourself
to be an excellent wife all the time you were at Hartfield.
You might
not give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem to
promise; but you were receiving a very good education from _her_, on
the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will, and
doing as you were bid; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a
wife, I should certainly have named Miss Taylor.”

“Thank you.
There will be very little merit in making a good wife to
such a man as Mr.
Weston.”

“Why, to own the truth, I am afraid you are rather thrown away, and
that with every disposition to bear, there will be nothing to be borne.
We will not despair, however.
Weston may grow cross from the wantonness
of comfort, or his son may plague him.”

“I hope not _that_.—It is not likely.
I hope, with all my heart, the
young man may be a Weston in merit, and a Churchill in fortune.—But
Harriet Smith—I have not half done about Harriet Smith.
I think her the
very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have.
She knows
nothing herself, and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing.
She is a
flatterer in all her ways; and so much the worse, because undesigned.
Her ignorance is hourly flattery.
And as for Harriet, I will venture to say that _she_
cannot gain by the acquaintance.
I am much mistaken if Emma’s
doctrines give any strength of mind, or tend at all to make a girl
adapt herself rationally to the varieties of her situation in
life.—They only give a little polish.”

“I either depend more upon Emma’s good sense than you do, or am more
anxious for her present comfort; for I cannot lament the acquaintance.
How well she looked last night!”

“Oh! you would rather talk of her person than her mind, would you?
Very
well; I shall not attempt to deny Emma’s being pretty.”

“Pretty! say beautiful rather.
Can you imagine any thing nearer perfect
beauty than Emma altogether—face and figure?”

“I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess that I have seldom
seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers.
She is loveliness itself.
Knightley, is not she?”

“I have not a fault to find with her person,” he replied. “I think her
all you describe.
I love to look at her; and I will add this praise,
that I do not think her personally vain.
Considering how very handsome
she is, she appears to be little occupied with it; her vanity lies
another way.
No, no; she has qualities which may be
trusted; she will never lead any one really wrong; she will make no
lasting blunder; where Emma errs once, she is in the right a hundred
times.”

“Very well; I will not plague you any more.
John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind
affection, and Isabella always thinks as he does; except when he is not
quite frightened enough about the children.
Pray excuse me; but supposing any
little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy, it cannot be
expected that Emma, accountable to nobody but her father, who perfectly
approves the acquaintance, should put an end to it, so long as it is a
source of pleasure to herself.
It has been so many years my province to
give advice, that you cannot be surprized, Mr.
It is very
good advice, and it shall have a better fate than your advice has often
found; for it shall be attended to.”

“Mrs.
John Knightley is easily alarmed, and might be made unhappy about
her sister.”

“Be satisfied,” said he, “I will not raise any outcry.
I will keep my
ill-humour to myself.
There is an anxiety, a curiosity in what one
feels for Emma.
I wonder what will become of her!”

“So do I,” said Mrs.
It would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in love
with a proper object.
But there is nobody hereabouts
to attach her; and she goes so seldom from home.”

“There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break her
resolution at present,” said Mrs.
Weston, “as can well be; and while
she is so happy at Hartfield, I cannot wish her to be forming any
attachment which would be creating such difficulties on poor Mr.
Weston’s on the subject, as much as possible.
There were wishes
at Randalls respecting Emma’s destiny, but it was not desirable to have
them suspected; and the quiet transition which Mr.
Elton’s being a remarkably handsome man, with most agreeable manners;
and as she had no hesitation in following up the assurance of his
admiration by agreeable hints, she was soon pretty confident of
creating as much liking on Harriet’s side, as there could be any
occasion for.
Elton’s being in the
fairest way of falling in love, if not in love already.
She had no
scruple with regard to him.
He talked of Harriet, and praised her so
warmly, that she could not suppose any thing wanting which a little
time would not add.
His perception of the striking improvement of
Harriet’s manner, since her introduction at Hartfield, was not one of
the least agreeable proofs of his growing attachment.

“You have given Miss Smith all that she required,” said he; “you have
made her graceful and easy.
I have
done very little.”

“If it were admissible to contradict a lady,” said the gallant Mr.
Elton—

“I have perhaps given her a little more decision of character, have
taught her to think on points which had not fallen in her way before.”

“Exactly so; that is what principally strikes me.
I would
give any money for it.
But from one cause or
another, I gave it up in disgust.
But really, I could almost venture,
if Harriet would sit to me.
Elton; “it would indeed be a delight!
How could you
suppose me ignorant?
You know nothing of drawing.
Don’t pretend to be in
raptures about mine.
Keep your raptures for Harriet’s face. “Well, if
you give me such kind encouragement, Mr.
Elton, I believe I shall try
what I can do.
As you will do it,
it will indeed, to use your own words, be an exquisite possession.”

“But I am afraid, Mr.
Elton, Harriet will not like to sit.
Did not you observe her manner of
answering me?
How completely it meant, ‘why should my picture be
drawn?’”

“Oh! yes, I observed it, I assure you.
It was not lost on me.
Her many
beginnings were displayed.
Miniatures, half-lengths, whole-lengths,
pencil, crayon, and water-colours had been all tried in turn.
She had
always wanted to do every thing, and had made more progress both in
drawing and music than many might have done with so little labour as
she would ever submit to.
She was not much deceived as
to her own skill either as an artist or a musician, but she was not
unwilling to have others deceived, or sorry to know her reputation for
accomplishment often higher than it deserved.
There was merit in every drawing—in the least finished, perhaps the
most; her style was spirited; but had there been much less, or had
there been ten times more, the delight and admiration of her two
companions would have been the same.
Weston
again, and again, and again, you see.
I should have made a good likeness of her, if she
would have sat longer, but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her
four children that she would not be quiet.
She was so eager to have them
drawn that I could not refuse; but there is no making children of three
or four years old stand still you know; nor can it be very easy to take
any likeness of them, beyond the air and complexion, unless they are
coarser featured than any of mama’s children ever were.
Here is my
sketch of the fourth, who was a baby.
He had nestled down his head most conveniently.
I am rather proud of little George.
The corner of the sofa
is very good.
John Knightley.—This did not want much of being finished, when I
put it away in a pet, and vowed I would never take another likeness.
I
could not help being provoked; for after all my pains, and when I had
really made a very good likeness of it—(Mrs.
Weston and I were quite
agreed in thinking it _very_ like)—only too handsome—too flattering—but
that was a fault on the right side”—after all this, came poor dear
Isabella’s cold approbation of—“Yes, it was a little like—but to be
sure it did not do him justice.
It was made a great favour of; and
altogether it was more than I could bear; and so I never would finish
it, to have it apologised over as an unfavourable likeness, to every
morning visitor in Brunswick Square;—and, as I said, I did then
forswear ever drawing any body again.
Elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the idea, and
was repeating, “No husbands and wives in the case at present indeed, as
you observe.
Exactly so.
It was to be a
whole-length in water-colours, like Mr.
It then occurred to her
to employ him in reading.

“If he would be so good as to read to them, it would be a kindness
indeed!
Elton was only too happy.
She could not respect his eye, but his love and
his complaisance were unexceptionable.
The sitting was altogether very satisfactory; she was quite enough
pleased with the first day’s sketch to wish to go on.
There was no want
of likeness, she had been fortunate in the attitude, and as she meant
to throw in a little improvement to the figure, to give a little more
height, and considerably more elegance, she had great confidence of its
being in every way a pretty drawing at last, and of its filling its
destined place with credit to them both—a standing memorial of the
beauty of one, the skill of the other, and the friendship of both; with
as many other agreeable associations as Mr.
Harriet was to sit again the next day; and Mr.
Elton, just as he ought,
entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again.

“By all means.
We shall be most happy to consider you as one of the
party.”

The same civilities and courtesies, the same success and satisfaction,
took place on the morrow, and accompanied the whole progress of the
picture, which was rapid and happy.
Weston to him—not in the least suspecting that
she was addressing a lover.—“The expression of the eye is most correct,
but Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes.
We must allow for the effect of shade, you know.”

“You have made her too tall, Emma,” said Mr.
Knightley.
Emma knew that she had, but would not own it; and Mr.
Elton warmly
added,

“Oh no! certainly not too tall; not in the least too tall.
Exactly so indeed!”

“It is very pretty,” said Mr.
Woodhouse. “So prettily done!
Just as
your drawings always are, my dear.
The only thing I do not thoroughly like is, that she
seems to be sitting out of doors, with only a little shawl over her
shoulders—and it makes one think she must catch cold.”

“But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer; a warm day in summer.
Look at the tree.”

“But it is never safe to sit out of doors, my dear.”

“You, sir, may say any thing,” cried Mr.
Elton, “but I must confess
that I regard it as a most happy thought, the placing of Miss Smith out
of doors; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit!
Any
other situation would have been much less in character.
Woodhouse could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in
the fogs of December.
His gallantry was always on the alert.
“Might he be trusted with the commission, what infinite pleasure should
he have in executing it! he could ride to London at any time.
It was
impossible to say how much he should be gratified by being employed on
such an errand.”

“He was too good!—she could not endure the thought!—she would not give
him such a troublesome office for the world,”—brought on the desired
repetition of entreaties and assurances,—and a very few minutes settled
the business.
I come in for a pretty good share as a second.
But it is his gratitude on Harriet’s account.”




CHAPTER VII


The very day of Mr.
Elton’s going to London produced a fresh occasion
for Emma’s services towards her friend.
Half a
minute brought it all out.
Martin, and contained a direct proposal
of marriage. “Who could have thought it?
She was so surprized she did
not know what to do.
And he wrote as if he really loved her
very much—but she did not know—and so, she was come as fast as she
could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do.—” Emma was half-ashamed
of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful.

“Upon my word,” she cried, “the young man is determined not to lose any
thing for want of asking.
He will connect himself well if he can.”

“Will you read the letter?” cried Harriet. “Pray do.
I’d rather you
would.”

Emma was not sorry to be pressed.
The
style of the letter was much above her expectation.
There were not
merely no grammatical errors, but as a composition it would not have
disgraced a gentleman; the language, though plain, was strong and
unaffected, and the sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of
the writer.
She paused over it,
while Harriet stood anxiously watching for her opinion, with a “Well,
well,” and was at last forced to add, “Is it a good letter? or is it
too short?”

“Yes, indeed, a very good letter,” replied Emma rather slowly—“so good
a letter, Harriet, that every thing considered, I think one of his
sisters must have helped him.
I can hardly imagine the young man whom I
saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well, if
left quite to his own powers, and yet it is not the style of a woman;
no, certainly, it is too strong and concise; not diffuse enough for a
woman.
No doubt he is a sensible man, and I suppose may have a natural
talent for—thinks strongly and clearly—and when he takes a pen in hand,
his thoughts naturally find proper words.
Yes,
I understand the sort of mind.
In what respect?
Do you mean with regard to this
letter?”

“Yes.”

“But what are you in doubt of?
You must answer it of course—and
speedily.”

“Yes.
My dear Harriet, what do you mean?
I thought—but I beg your pardon, perhaps I have been
under a mistake.
I had imagined you
were consulting me only as to the wording of it.”

Harriet was silent.
With a little reserve of manner, Emma continued:

“You mean to return a favourable answer, I collect.”

“No, I do not; that is, I do not mean—What shall I do?
What would you
advise me to do?
Pray, dear Miss Woodhouse, tell me what I ought to
do.”

“I shall not give you any advice, Harriet.
This is a point which you must settle with your feelings.”

“I had no notion that he liked me so very much,” said Harriet,
contemplating the letter.
For a little while Emma persevered in her
silence; but beginning to apprehend the bewitching flattery of that
letter might be too powerful, she thought it best to say,

“I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman _doubts_ as
to whether she should accept a man or not, she certainly ought to
refuse him.
It is not a state to be safely entered into with doubtful
feelings, with half a heart.
You must be the best judge of your own happiness.
If you
prefer Mr.
You blush, Harriet.—Does any body else occur to you at this
moment under such a definition?
Harriet, Harriet, do not deceive
yourself; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion.
At this
moment whom are you thinking of?”

The symptoms were favourable.—Instead of answering, Harriet turned away
confused, and stood thoughtfully by the fire; and though the letter was
still in her hand, it was now mechanically twisted about without
regard.
Martin.
Do you think I am right?”

“Perfectly, perfectly right, my dearest Harriet; you are doing just
what you ought.
While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings to
myself, but now that you are so completely decided I have no hesitation
in approving.
That would have
been too dreadful!—What an escape!—Dear Miss Woodhouse, I would not
give up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with you for any
thing in the world.”

“Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang to lose you; but it
must have been.
You would have thrown yourself out of all good society.
I must have given you up.”

“Dear me!—How should I ever have borne it!
It would have killed me
never to come to Hartfield any more!”

“Dear affectionate creature!—_You_ banished to Abbey-Mill Farm!—_You_
confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life!
We will not be
parted.
Nobody cares for a letter; the thing is, to be always
happy with pleasant companions.
I am quite determined to refuse him.
But how shall I do?
This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and sent.
The business
was finished, and Harriet safe.
You
are a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared to
Abbey-Mill.”

“And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am never happy
but at Hartfield.”

Some time afterwards it was, “I think Mrs.
Goddard would be very much
surprized if she knew what had happened.
I am sure Miss Nash would—for
Miss Nash thinks her own sister very well married, and it is only a
linen-draper.”

“One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher
of a school, Harriet.
As to any thing superior for you, I suppose she
is quite in the dark.
Hitherto I fancy you and I are
the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained
themselves.”

Harriet blushed and smiled, and said something about wondering that
people should like her so much.
The idea of Mr.
Elton was certainly
cheering; but still, after a time, she was tender-hearted again towards
the rejected Mr.
I hope he will not mind it so very much.”

“Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfully
employed,” cried Emma. “At this moment, perhaps, Mr.
Elton.
No, my dear little modest
Harriet, depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond-street till
just before he mounts his horse to-morrow.
It opens his designs to his family,
it introduces you among them, it diffuses through the party those
pleasantest feelings of our nature, eager curiosity and warm
prepossession.
CHAPTER VIII


Harriet slept at Hartfield that night.
For some weeks past she had been
spending more than half her time there, and gradually getting to have a
bed-room appropriated to herself; and Emma judged it best in every
respect, safest and kindest, to keep her with them as much as possible
just at present.
She was obliged to go the next morning for an hour or
two to Mrs.
Goddard’s, but it was then to be settled that she should
return to Hartfield, to make a regular visit of some days.
While she was gone, Mr.
Knightley called, and sat some time with Mr.
As the sun is out, I believe I had
better take my three turns while I can.
I treat you without ceremony,
Mr.
Knightley.
We invalids think we are privileged people.”

“My dear sir, do not make a stranger of me.”

“I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter.
Emma will be happy to
entertain you.
And therefore I think I will beg your excuse and take my
three turns—my winter walk.”

“You cannot do better, sir.”

“I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr.
Knightley, instead of being
immediately off likewise, sat down again, seemingly inclined for more
chat.
He began speaking of Harriet, and speaking of her with more
voluntary praise than Emma had ever heard before.

“I cannot rate her beauty as you do,” said he; “but she is a pretty
little creature, and I am inclined to think very well of her
disposition.
She has been gone longer already than she
intended.”

“Something has happened to delay her; some visitors perhaps.”

“Highbury gossips!—Tiresome wretches!”

“Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would.”

Emma knew this was too true for contradiction, and therefore said
nothing.
He presently added, with a smile,

“I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell you that I
have good reason to believe your little friend will soon hear of
something to her advantage.”

“Indeed! how so? of what sort?”

“A very serious sort, I assure you;” still smiling.

“Very serious!
Who makes you their confidant?”

Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr.
Mr.
Knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser, and she knew
Mr.
Her visit to Abbey-Mill, this
summer, seems to have done his business.
He is desperately in love and
means to marry her.”

“He is very obliging,” said Emma; “but is he sure that Harriet means to
marry him?”

“Well, well, means to make her an offer then.
He came to ask me whether I
thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early; whether I
thought her too young: in short, whether I approved his choice
altogether; having some apprehension perhaps of her being considered
(especially since _your_ making so much of her) as in a line of society
above him.
I was very much pleased with all that he said.
He told me every
thing; his circumstances and plans, and what they all proposed doing in
the event of his marriage.
He is an excellent young man, both as son
and brother.
He proved to
me that he could afford it; and that being the case, I was convinced he
could not do better.
This happened
the night before last.
Now, as we may fairly suppose, he would not
allow much time to pass before he spoke to the lady, and as he does not
appear to have spoken yesterday, it is not unlikely that he should be
at Mrs.
Goddard’s to-day; and she may be detained by a visitor, without
thinking him at all a tiresome wretch.”

“Pray, Mr.
Was not she the whole day with you?”

“Come,” said she, “I will tell you something, in return for what you
have told me.
He did speak yesterday—that is, he wrote, and was
refused.”

This was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed; and Mr.
But what is the
meaning of this?
Harriet Smith refuse Robert Martin? madness, if it is
so; but I hope you are mistaken.”

“I saw her answer!—nothing could be clearer.”

“You saw her answer!—you wrote her answer too.
Emma, this is your
doing.
You persuaded her to refuse him.”

“And if I did, (which, however, I am far from allowing) I should not
feel that I had done wrong.
By your account, he
does seem to have had some scruples.
It is a pity that they were ever
got over.”

“Not Harriet’s equal!” exclaimed Mr.
Knightley loudly and warmly; and
with calmer asperity, added, a few moments afterwards, “No, he is not
her equal indeed, for he is as much her superior in sense as in
situation.
Emma, your infatuation about that girl blinds you.
What are
Harriet Smith’s claims, either of birth, nature or education, to any
connexion higher than Robert Martin?
She is known only as
parlour-boarder at a common school.
She is not a sensible girl, nor a
girl of any information.
At her age she
can have no experience, and with her little wit, is not very likely
ever to have any that can avail her.
She is pretty, and she is good
tempered, and that is all.
I felt that, as to fortune, in all probability he might do much better;
and that as to a rational companion or useful helpmate, he could not do
worse.
The advantage of the match I felt to be all on
her side; and had not the smallest doubt (nor have I now) that there
would be a general cry-out upon her extreme good luck.
It crossed my mind immediately that you
would not regret your friend’s leaving Highbury, for the sake of her
being settled so well.
I remember saying to myself, ‘Even Emma, with
all her partiality for Harriet, will think this a good match.’”

“I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say
any such thing.
What! think a farmer, (and with all his sense and all
his merit Mr.
Martin is nothing more,) a good match for my intimate
friend!
I assure you
mine are very different.
You are not just to Harriet’s claims.
They would be estimated very
differently by others as well as myself; Mr.
Martin may be the richest
of the two, but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in
society.—The sphere in which she moves is much above his.—It would be a
degradation.”

“A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance, to be married to a
respectable, intelligent gentleman-farmer!”

“As to the circumstances of her birth, though in a legal sense she may
be called Nobody, it will not hold in common sense.
Robert Martin.”

“Whoever might be her parents,” said Mr.
Goddard’s line, to have Mrs.
Goddard’s acquaintance.
Her friends
evidently thought this good enough for her; and it _was_ good enough.
She desired nothing better herself.
Till you chose to turn her into a
friend, her mind had no distaste for her own set, nor any ambition
beyond it.
She had no sense of superiority then.
If she has it now, you have given
it.
He has too much real feeling
to address any woman on the haphazard of selfish passion.
And as to
conceit, he is the farthest from it of any man I know.
Martin; but, as I said before, are
unjust to Harriet.
She is not a clever girl, but she
has better sense than you are aware of, and does not deserve to have
her understanding spoken of so slightingly.
Her good-nature, too, is
not so very slight a claim, comprehending, as it does, real, thorough
sweetness of temper and manner, a very humble opinion of herself, and a
great readiness to be pleased with other people.
Better be without sense, than misapply
it as you do.”

“To be sure!” cried she playfully. “I know _that_ is the feeling of you
all.
Harriet may pick and chuse.
And is she, at seventeen, just
entering into life, just beginning to be known, to be wondered at
because she does not accept the first offer she receives?
Nothing so easy as for a young lady to raise her expectations
too high.
Men of sense, whatever you may
chuse to say, do not want silly wives.
Goddard’s all the rest of her life—or, at least, (for Harriet Smith is
a girl who will marry somebody or other,) till she grow desperate, and
is glad to catch at the old writing-master’s son.”

“We think so very differently on this point, Mr.
His
appearance is so much against him, and his manner so bad, that if she
ever were disposed to favour him, she is not now.
I can imagine, that
before she had seen any body superior, she might tolerate him.
He was
the brother of her friends, and he took pains to please her; and
altogether, having seen nobody better (that must have been his great
assistant) she might not, while she was at Abbey-Mill, find him
disagreeable.
Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence, with only one attempt
on Emma’s side to talk of the weather, but he made no answer.
He was
thinking.
The result of his thoughts appeared at last in these words.

“Robert Martin has no great loss—if he can but think so; and I hope it
will not be long before he does.
He continued,

“Depend upon it, Elton will not do.
Elton is a very good sort of man,
and a very respectable vicar of Highbury, but not at all likely to make
an imprudent match.
He knows the value of a good income as well as any
body.
He knows that he is a very handsome young man, and a great favourite
wherever he goes; and from his general way of talking in unreserved
moments, when there are only men present, I am convinced that he does
not mean to throw himself away.
I have heard him speak with great
animation of a large family of young ladies that his sisters are
intimate with, who have all twenty thousand pounds apiece.”

“I am very much obliged to you,” said Emma, laughing again. “If I had
set my heart on Mr.
Elton’s marrying Harriet, it would have been very
kind to open my eyes; but at present I only want to keep Harriet to
myself.
I have done with match-making indeed.
I could never hope to
equal my own doings at Randalls.
I shall leave off while I am well.”

“Good morning to you,”—said he, rising and walking off abruptly.
He was
very much vexed.
He felt the disappointment of the young man, and was
mortified to have been the means of promoting it, by the sanction he
had given; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in the
affair, was provoking him exceedingly.
Emma remained in a state of vexation too; but there was more
indistinctness in the causes of her’s, than in his.
He
walked off in more complete self-approbation than he left for her.
Harriet’s
staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy.
The possibility
of the young man’s coming to Mrs.
Goddard’s that morning, and meeting
with Harriet and pleading his own cause, gave alarming ideas.
The dread
of such a failure after all became the prominent uneasiness; and when
Harriet appeared, and in very good spirits, and without having any such
reason to give for her long absence, she felt a satisfaction which
settled her with her own mind, and convinced her, that let Mr.
Knightley think or say what he would, she had done nothing which
woman’s friendship and woman’s feelings would not justify.
He had frightened her a little about Mr.
Elton; but when she considered
that Mr.
Mr.
Elton.
Martin, but to talk of Mr.
Elton.
Elton was actually on his road to
London, and not meaning to return till the morrow, though it was the
whist-club night, which he had been never known to miss before; and Mr.
Perry had remonstrated with him about it, and told him how shabby it
was in him, their best player, to absent himself, and tried very much
to persuade him to put off his journey only one day; but it would not
do; Mr.
Miss Nash had told her all this, and had talked a great deal
more about Mr.
Elton; and said, looking so very significantly at her,
“that she did not pretend to understand what his business might be, but
she only knew that any woman whom Mr.
Elton
had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness.”




CHAPTER IX


Mr.
Knightley might quarrel with her, but Emma could not quarrel with
herself.
She was sorry, but could not
repent.
On the contrary, her plans and proceedings were more and more
justified and endeared to her by the general appearances of the next
few days.
The Picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand soon after Mr.
Martin’s being no otherwise remembered,
than as he furnished a contrast with Mr.
Her views of improving her little friend’s mind, by a great deal of
useful reading and conversation, had never yet led to more than a few
first chapters, and the intention of going on to-morrow.
Goddard’s, had written
out at least three hundred; and Harriet, who had taken the first hint
of it from her, hoped, with Miss Woodhouse’s help, to get a great many
more.
Emma assisted with her invention, memory and taste; and as
Harriet wrote a very pretty hand, it was likely to be an arrangement of
the first order, in form as well as quantity.
Woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as the
girls, and tried very often to recollect something worth their putting
in. “So many clever riddles as there used to be when he was young—he
wondered he could not remember them! but he hoped he should in time.”
And it always ended in “Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.”

His good friend Perry, too, whom he had spoken to on the subject, did
not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kind; but he had
desired Perry to be upon the watch, and as he went about so much,
something, he thought, might come from that quarter.
It was by no means his daughter’s wish that the intellects of Highbury
in general should be put under requisition.
Elton was the only one
whose assistance she asked.
He was invited to contribute any really
good enigmas, charades, or conundrums that he might recollect; and she
had the pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his
recollections; and at the same time, as she could perceive, most
earnestly careful that nothing ungallant, nothing that did not breathe
a compliment to the sex should pass his lips.
They owed to him their
two or three politest puzzles; and the joy and exultation with which at
last he recalled, and rather sentimentally recited, that well-known
charade,

My first doth affliction denote,
    Which my second is destin’d to feel
And my whole is the best antidote
    That affliction to soften and heal.—


made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it some
pages ago already.

“Why will not you write one yourself for us, Mr.
He was afraid not even Miss Woodhouse”—he
stopt a moment—“or Miss Smith could inspire him.”

The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration.
He called
for a few moments, just to leave a piece of paper on the table
containing, as he said, a charade, which a friend of his had addressed
to a young lady, the object of his admiration, but which, from his
manner, Emma was immediately convinced must be his own.

“I do not offer it for Miss Smith’s collection,” said he. “Being my
friend’s, I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye,
but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it.”

The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet, which Emma could
understand.
Take your own.”

But Harriet was in a tremor, and could not touch it; and Emma, never
loth to be first, was obliged to examine it herself.
But ah! united, what reverse we have!
Man’s boasted power and freedom, all are flown;
Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,
    And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.
She cast her eye over it, pondered, caught the meaning, read it through
again to be quite certain, and quite mistress of the lines, and then
passing it to Harriet, sat happily smiling, and saying to herself,
while Harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope
and dulness, “Very well, Mr.
I give you credit for it.
This is saying very plainly—‘Pray, Miss Smith,
give me leave to pay my addresses to you.
Approve my charade and my
intentions in the same glance.’

May its approval beam in that soft eye!
Harriet exactly.
Soft is the very word for her eye—of all epithets, the
justest that could be given.
All the better.
For once in your life
you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken.
An excellent charade
indeed! and very much to the purpose.
Things must come to a crisis soon
now.”

She was obliged to break off from these very pleasant observations,
which were otherwise of a sort to run into great length, by the
eagerness of Harriet’s wondering questions.

“What can it be, Miss Woodhouse?—what can it be?
I have not an idea—I
cannot guess it in the least.
Do try to find
it out, Miss Woodhouse.
I never saw any thing so hard.
I wonder who the friend was—and who could be the young
lady.
Do you think it is a good one?
Can it be woman?
And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.
Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!
It must be very clever, or he would not have brought it.
Miss Woodhouse, do you think we shall ever find it out?”

“Mermaids and sharks!
My dear Harriet, what are you thinking
of?
Where would be the use of his bringing us a charade made by a
friend upon a mermaid or a shark?
Give me the paper and listen.
That is _court_.
That is _ship_;—plain as it can be.—Now for the cream.
There can be no doubt of
its being written for you and to you.”

Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion.
She could not
speak.
But she was not wanted to speak.
Elton’s intentions.
I
thought it must be so.
I thought I could not be so deceived; but now,
it is clear; the state of his mind is as clear and decided, as my
wishes on the subject have been ever since I knew you.
Yes, Harriet,
just so long have I been wanting the very circumstance to happen that
has happened.
I could never tell whether an attachment between you and
Mr.
Elton were most desirable or most natural.
I am very happy.
I
congratulate you, my dear Harriet, with all my heart.
This is an
attachment which a woman may well feel pride in creating.
Mr.
Elton’s superiority had very ample acknowledgment.

“Whatever you say is always right,” cried Harriet, “and therefore I
suppose, and believe, and hope it must be so; but otherwise I could not
have imagined it.
Only think of those sweet verses—‘To Miss ———.’
Dear me, how clever!—Could it really be meant for me?”

“I cannot make a question, or listen to a question about that.
You and Mr.
There does seem to be a
something in the air of Hartfield which gives love exactly the right
direction, and sends it into the very channel where it ought to flow.
And he, the very
handsomest man that ever was, and a man that every body looks up to,
quite like Mr.
Knightley!
And so
excellent in the Church!
Miss Nash has put down all the texts he has
ever preached from since he came to Highbury.
Dear me!
How little did I think!—The two Abbots and
I ran into the front room and peeped through the blind when we heard he
was going by, and Miss Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to look
through herself; however, she called me back presently, and let me look
too, which was very good-natured.
He was arm-in-arm with Mr.
Cole.”

“This is an alliance which, whoever—whatever your friends may be, must
be agreeable to them, provided at least they have common sense; and we
are not to be addressing our conduct to fools.
Elton are one as clever as the
other.
This charade!—If I had studied a twelvemonth, I could never have
made any thing like it.”

“I thought he meant to try his skill, by his manner of declining it
yesterday.”

“I do think it is, without exception, the best charade I ever read.”

“I never read one more to the purpose, certainly.”

“It is as long again as almost all we have had before.”

“I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour.
Such
things in general cannot be too short.”

Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear.
The most satisfactory
comparisons were rising in her mind.

“It is one thing,” said she, presently—her cheeks in a glow—“to have
very good sense in a common way, like every body else, and if there is
any thing to say, to sit down and write a letter, and say just what you
must, in a short way; and another, to write verses and charades like
this.”

Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr.
Martin’s
prose.

“Such sweet lines!” continued Harriet—“these two last!—But how shall I
ever be able to return the paper, or say I have found it out?—Oh!
He will be here this evening, I dare
say, and then I will give it him back, and some nonsense or other will
pass between us, and you shall not be committed.—Your soft eyes shall
chuse their own time for beaming.
Trust to me.”

“Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not write this beautiful
charade into my book!
The couplet does not cease to be, nor does its
meaning change.
But take it away, and all _appropriation_ ceases, and a
very pretty gallant charade remains, fit for any collection.
Give me the book, I will write it down, and then there can
be no possible reflection on you.”

Harriet submitted, though her mind could hardly separate the parts, so
as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down a
declaration of love.
It seemed too precious an offering for any degree
of publicity.

“I shall never let that book go out of my own hands,” said she.

“Very well,” replied Emma; “a most natural feeling; and the longer it
lasts, the better I shall be pleased.
But here is my father coming: you
will not object to my reading the charade to him.
It will be giving him
so much pleasure!
Do not be overpowered by such a little
tribute of admiration.
Woodhouse came in, and very soon led to the subject again, by the
recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of “Well, my dears, how does
your book go on?—Have you got any thing fresh?”

“Yes, papa; we have something to read you, something quite fresh.
A
piece of paper was found on the table this morning—(dropt, we suppose,
by a fairy)—containing a very pretty charade, and we have just copied
it in.”

She read it to him, just as he liked to have any thing read, slowly and
distinctly, and two or three times over, with explanations of every
part as she proceeded—and he was very much pleased, and, as she had
foreseen, especially struck with the complimentary conclusion.

“Aye, that’s very just, indeed, that’s very properly said.
Your dear mother
was so clever at all those things!
If I had but her memory!
And that is all that I can recollect of it—but it is very clever all
the way through.
We copied it from the
Elegant Extracts.
The name makes me think of poor Isabella; for she was very near being
christened Catherine after her grandmama.
I hope we shall have her here
next week.
Have you thought, my dear, where you shall put her—and what
room there will be for the children?”

“Oh! yes—she will have her own room, of course; the room she always
has;—and there is the nursery for the children,—just as usual, you
know.
Why should there be any change?”

“I do not know, my dear—but it is so long since she was here!—not since
last Easter, and then only for a few days.—Mr.
Weston to dine with us, while Isabella is
here.”

“Yes, my dear, if there is time.—But—(in a very depressed tone)—she is
coming for only one week.
Mr.
Knightley promises to give up his claim
this Christmas—though you know it is longer since they were with him,
than with us.”

“It would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor Isabella were to be
anywhere but at Hartfield.”

Mr.
Woodhouse could never allow for Mr.
He sat
musing a little while, and then said,

“But I do not see why poor Isabella should be obliged to go back so
soon, though he does.
I think, Emma, I shall try and persuade her to
stay longer with us.
Isabella cannot bear to stay behind her
husband.”

This was too true for contradiction.
Poor little dears, how glad they will be
to come.
They are very fond of being at Hartfield, Harriet.”

“I dare say they are, sir.
Henry is the
eldest, he was named after me, not after his father.
It is such
enjoyment to them, that if their uncle did not lay down the rule of
their taking turns, whichever began would never give way to the other.”

“Well, I cannot understand it.”

“That is the case with us all, papa.
One half of the world cannot
understand the pleasures of the other.”

Later in the morning, and just as the girls were going to separate in
preparation for the regular four o’clock dinner, the hero of this
inimitable charade walked in again.
Harriet turned away; but Emma could
receive him with the usual smile, and her quick eye soon discerned in
his the consciousness of having made a push—of having thrown a die; and
she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up.
His ostensible
reason, however, was to ask whether Mr.
Woodhouse’s party could be made
up in the evening without him, or whether he should be in the smallest
degree necessary at Hartfield.
Emma thanked him, but could not allow of his disappointing his friend
on their account; her father was sure of his rubber.
We admired it so much, that I have
ventured to write it into Miss Smith’s collection.
Of course I have not transcribed beyond the first
eight lines.”

Mr.
Elton, though hesitating
a good deal while he spoke; “I have no hesitation in saying—at least if
my friend feels at all as _I_ do—I have not the smallest doubt that,
could he see his little effusion honoured as _I_ see it, (looking at
the book again, and replacing it on the table), he would consider it as
the proudest moment of his life.”

After this speech he was gone as soon as possible.
Emma could not think
it too soon; for with all his good and agreeable qualities, there was a
sort of parade in his speeches which was very apt to incline her to
laugh.
Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane, a lane
leading at right angles from the broad, though irregular, main street
of the place; and, as may be inferred, containing the blessed abode of
Mr.
Elton.
It had
no advantage of situation; but had been very much smartened up by the
present proprietor; and, such as it was, there could be no possibility
of the two friends passing it without a slackened pace and observing
eyes.—Emma’s remark was—

“There it is.
Elton’s seeing ready wit in her.

“I wish we could contrive it,” said she; “but I cannot think of any
tolerable pretence for going in;—no servant that I want to inquire
about of his housekeeper—no message from my father.”

She pondered, but could think of nothing.
If I were to
marry, I must expect to repent it.”

“Dear me!—it is so odd to hear a woman talk so!”—

“I have none of the usual inducements of women to marry.
Fortune I do not want; employment I do not want;
consequence I do not want: I believe few married women are half as much
mistress of their husband’s house as I am of Hartfield; and never,
never could I expect to be so truly beloved and important; so always
first and always right in any man’s eyes as I am in my father’s.”

“But then, to be an old maid at last, like Miss Bates!”

“That is as formidable an image as you could present, Harriet; and if I
thought I should ever be like Miss Bates! so silly—so satisfied—so
smiling—so prosing—so undistinguishing and unfastidious—and so apt to
tell every thing relative to every body about me, I would marry
to-morrow.
But between _us_, I am convinced there never can be any
likeness, except in being unmarried.”

“But still, you will be an old maid! and that’s so dreadful!”

“Never mind, Harriet, I shall not be a poor old maid; and it is poverty
only which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public!
This does not apply, however, to Miss Bates; she is only too
good natured and too silly to suit me; but, in general, she is very
much to the taste of every body, though single and though poor.
And as for
objects of interest, objects for the affections, which is in truth the
great point of inferiority, the want of which is really the great evil
to be avoided in _not_ marrying, I shall be very well off, with all the
children of a sister I love so much, to care about.
There will be
enough of them, in all probability, to supply every sort of sensation
that declining life can need.
There will be enough for every hope and
every fear; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a
parent, it suits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and
blinder.
That is, I know you must have seen her
a hundred times—but are you acquainted?”

“Oh! yes; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes to
Highbury.
By the bye, _that_ is almost enough to put one out of conceit
with a niece.
Emma was very compassionate; and the distresses of the poor
were as sure of relief from her personal attention and kindness, her
counsel and her patience, as from her purse.
She understood their ways,
could allow for their ignorance and their temptations, had no romantic
expectations of extraordinary virtue from those for whom education had
done so little; entered into their troubles with ready sympathy, and
always gave her assistance with as much intelligence as good-will.
How trifling they make
every thing else appear!—I feel now as if I could think of nothing but
these poor creatures all the rest of the day; and yet, who can say how
soon it may all vanish from my mind?”

“Very true,” said Harriet. “Poor creatures! one can think of nothing
else.”

“And really, I do not think the impression will soon be over,” said
Emma, as she crossed the low hedge, and tottering footstep which ended
the narrow, slippery path through the cottage garden, and brought them
into the lane again. “I do not think it will,” stopping to look once
more at all the outward wretchedness of the place, and recall the still
greater within.

“Oh! dear, no,” said her companion.
They walked on.
The lane made a slight bend; and when that bend was
passed, Mr.
Well, (smiling,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion
has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers, it has done all that
is truly important.
Elton then turned back to
accompany them.

“To fall in with each other on such an errand as this,” thought Emma;
“to meet in a charitable scheme; this will bring a great increase of
love on each side.
It must, if I were not here.
I wish I were anywhere else.”

Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could, she soon
afterwards took possession of a narrow footpath, a little raised on one
side of the lane, leaving them together in the main road.
They did as they were desired; and by the time
she judged it reasonable to have done with her boot, she had the
comfort of farther delay in her power, being overtaken by a child from
the cottage, setting out, according to orders, with her pitcher, to
fetch broth from Hartfield.
She gained on them, however,
involuntarily: the child’s pace was quick, and theirs rather slow; and
she was the more concerned at it, from their being evidently in a
conversation which interested them.
Mr.
Elton was speaking with
animation, Harriet listening with a very pleased attention; and Emma,
having sent the child on, was beginning to think how she might draw
back a little more, when they both looked around, and she was obliged
to join them.
Mr.
Elton was still talking, still engaged in some interesting detail;
and Emma experienced some disappointment when she found that he was
only giving his fair companion an account of the yesterday’s party at
his friend Cole’s, and that she was come in herself for the Stilton
cheese, the north Wiltshire, the butter, the celery, the beet-root, and
all the dessert.

“This would soon have led to something better, of course,” was her
consoling reflection; “any thing interests between those who love; and
any thing will serve as introduction to what is near the heart.
If I
could but have kept longer away!”

They now walked on together quietly, till within view of the vicarage
pales, when a sudden resolution, of at least getting Harriet into the
house, made her again find something very much amiss about her boot,
and fall behind to arrange it once more.
She then broke the lace off
short, and dexterously throwing it into a ditch, was presently obliged
to entreat them to stop, and acknowledged her inability to put herself
to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort.

“Part of my lace is gone,” said she, “and I do not know how I am to
contrive.
Elton, I must beg leave to
stop at your house, and ask your housekeeper for a bit of ribband or
string, or any thing just to keep my boot on.”

Mr.
The room they
were taken into was the one he chiefly occupied, and looking forwards;
behind it was another with which it immediately communicated; the door
between them was open, and Emma passed into it with the housekeeper to
receive her assistance in the most comfortable manner.
She was obliged
to leave the door ajar as she found it; but she fully intended that Mr.
It
could be protracted no longer.
It had a most
favourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma felt the glory of
having schemed successfully.
The coming of her
sister’s family was so very near at hand, that first in anticipation,
and then in reality, it became henceforth her prime object of interest;
and during the ten days of their stay at Hartfield it was not to be
expected—she did not herself expect—that any thing beyond occasional,
fortuitous assistance could be afforded by her to the lovers.
Till this year, every long vacation since their marriage had
been divided between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey; but all the holidays
of this autumn had been given to sea-bathing for the children, and it
was therefore many months since they had been seen in a regular way by
their Surry connexions, or seen at all by Mr.
The bustle and joy of
such an arrival, the many to be talked to, welcomed, encouraged, and
variously dispersed and disposed of, produced a noise and confusion
which his nerves could not have borne under any other cause, nor have
endured much longer even for this; but the ways of Hartfield and the
feelings of her father were so respected by Mrs.
Mrs.
John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle,
quiet manners, and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate;
wrapt up in her family; a devoted wife, a doating mother, and so
tenderly attached to her father and sister that, but for these higher
ties, a warmer love might have seemed impossible.
She could never see a
fault in any of them.
Wingfield in town as her father could be
of Mr.
Mr.
John Knightley was a tall, gentleman-like, and very clever man;
rising in his profession, domestic, and respectable in his private
character; but with reserved manners which prevented his being
generally pleasing; and capable of being sometimes out of humour.
He
was not an ill-tempered man, not so often unreasonably cross as to
deserve such a reproach; but his temper was not his great perfection;
and, indeed, with such a worshipping wife, it was hardly possible that
any natural defects in it should not be increased.
He was not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law.
Nothing wrong
in him escaped her.
Perhaps she might have
passed over more had his manners been flattering to Isabella’s sister,
but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend, without
praise and without blindness; but hardly any degree of personal
compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of all
in her eyes which he sometimes fell into, the want of respectful
forbearance towards her father.
Woodhouse’s peculiarities and
fidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance or
sharp retort equally ill-bestowed.
It did not often happen; for Mr.
John Knightley had really a great regard for his father-in-law, and
generally a strong sense of what was due to him; but it was too often
for Emma’s charity, especially as there was all the pain of
apprehension frequently to be endured, though the offence came not.
They had not been long seated and
composed when Mr.
And dear Emma, too!—What a dreadful loss to you both!—I have been so
grieved for you.—I could not imagine how you could possibly do without
her.—It is a sad change indeed.—But I hope she is pretty well, sir.”

“Pretty well, my dear—I hope—pretty well.—I do not know but that the
place agrees with her tolerably.”

Mr.
John Knightley here asked Emma quietly whether there were any
doubts of the air of Randalls.

“Oh! no—none in the least.
I never saw Mrs.
Papa is only speaking his own regret.”

“Very much to the honour of both,” was the handsome reply.

“And do you see her, sir, tolerably often?” asked Isabella in the
plaintive tone which just suited her father.
Woodhouse hesitated.—“Not near so often, my dear, as I could wish.”

“Oh! papa, we have missed seeing them but one entire day since they
married.
Either in the morning or evening of every day, excepting one,
have we seen either Mr.
Weston, and generally both,
either at Randalls or here—and as you may suppose, Isabella, most
frequently here.
Mr.
Weston
is really as kind as herself.
Every body
must be aware that Miss Taylor must be missed, but every body ought
also to be assured that Mr. and Mrs.
John Knightley, “and just as I hoped
it was from your letters.
Woodhouse—“yes, certainly—I cannot deny
that Mrs.
Weston, poor Mrs.
Weston, does come and see us pretty
often—but then—she is always obliged to go away again.”

“It would be very hard upon Mr.
Weston if she did not, papa.—You quite
forget poor Mr.
Weston.”

“I think, indeed,” said John Knightley pleasantly, “that Mr.
Weston has
some little claim.
You and I, Emma, will venture to take the part of
the poor husband.
I, being a husband, and you not being a wife, the
claims of the man may very likely strike us with equal force.
As for
Isabella, she has been married long enough to see the convenience of
putting all the Mr.
Weston, that excellent Mr.
Weston, to congratulate her, and a very
proper, handsome letter it was.
Whether it was his own idea you know, one
cannot tell.
He is but young, and his uncle, perhaps—”

“My dear papa, he is three-and-twenty.
You forget how time passes.”

“Three-and-twenty!—is he indeed?—Well, I could not have thought it—and
he was but two years old when he lost his poor mother!
Well, time does
fly indeed!—and my memory is very bad.
However, it was an exceeding
good, pretty letter, and gave Mr. and Mrs.
I remember it was written from Weymouth, and dated Sept.
28th—and began, ‘My dear Madam,’ but I forget how it went on; and it
was signed ‘F.
C.
John
Knightley. “I have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man.
There is
something so shocking in a child’s being taken away from his parents
and natural home!
I never could comprehend how Mr.
I really never could think well of
any body who proposed such a thing to any body else.”

“Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills, I fancy,” observed Mr.
Weston to have
felt what you would feel in giving up Henry or John.
Mr.
Weston, and
had half a mind to take it up; but she struggled, and let it pass.
She
would keep the peace if possible; and there was something honourable
and valuable in the strong domestic habits, the all-sufficiency of home
to himself, whence resulted her brother’s disposition to look down on
the common rate of social intercourse, and those to whom it was
important.—It had a high claim to forbearance.
Knightley was to dine with them—rather against the inclination of
Mr.
Making-up indeed would not do. _She_ certainly had not been
in the wrong, and _he_ would never own that he had.
As to men and women, our opinions are sometimes very different;
but with regard to these children, I observe we never disagree.”

“If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and
women, and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings
with them, as you are where these children are concerned, we might
always think alike.”

“To be sure—our discordancies must always arise from my being in the
wrong.”

“Yes,” said he, smiling—“and reason good.
Be infinitely cleverer and not half so conceited.
Knightleys; their subjects totally
distinct, or very rarely mixing—and Emma only occasionally joining in
one or the other.
The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits, but principally
of those of the elder, whose temper was by much the most communicative,
and who was always the greater talker.
As a magistrate, he had
generally some point of law to consult John about, or, at least, some
curious anecdote to give; and as a farmer, as keeping in hand the
home-farm at Donwell, he had to tell what every field was to bear next
year, and to give all such local information as could not fail of being
interesting to a brother whose home it had equally been the longest
part of his life, and whose attachments were strong.
The plan of a
drain, the change of a fence, the felling of a tree, and the
destination of every acre for wheat, turnips, or spring corn, was
entered into with as much equality of interest by John, as his cooler
manners rendered possible; and if his willing brother ever left him any
thing to inquire about, his inquiries even approached a tone of
eagerness.
Woodhouse was enjoying a
full flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter.

“My poor dear Isabella,” said he, fondly taking her hand, and
interrupting, for a few moments, her busy labours for some one of her
five children—“How long it is, how terribly long since you were here!
And how tired you must be after your journey!
You must go to bed early,
my dear—and I recommend a little gruel to you before you go.—You and I
will have a nice basin of gruel together.
My dear Emma, suppose we all
have a little gruel.”

Emma could not suppose any such thing, knowing as she did, that both
the Mr.
I never had much opinion of the sea air.”

“Mr.
Wingfield most strenuously recommended it, sir—or we should not
have gone.
He recommended it for all the children, but particularly for
the weakness in little Bella’s throat,—both sea air and bathing.”

“Ah! my dear, but Perry had many doubts about the sea doing her any
good; and as to myself, I have been long perfectly convinced, though
perhaps I never told you so before, that the sea is very rarely of use
to any body.
My dear
Isabella, I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr.
Perry yet;
and he never forgets you.”

“Oh! good Mr.
Perry—how is he, sir?”

“Why, pretty well; but not quite well.
I suppose there is not a man in such practice
anywhere.
But then there is not so clever a man any where.”

“And Mrs.
I
have a great regard for Mr.
Perry.
I hope he will be calling soon.
Wingfield’s, which we have been applying at times ever since August.”

“It is not very likely, my dear, that bathing should have been of use
to her—and if I had known you were wanting an embrocation, I would have
spoken to—

“You seem to me to have forgotten Mrs. and Miss Bates,” said Emma, “I
have not heard one inquiry after them.”

“Oh! the good Bateses—I am quite ashamed of myself—but you mention them
in most of your letters.
I hope they are quite well.
Bates—I will call upon her to-morrow, and take my children.—They are
always so pleased to see my children.—And that excellent Miss
Bates!—such thorough worthy people!—How are they, sir?”

“Why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole.
Bates had a
bad cold about a month ago.”

“How sorry I am!
Mr.
Perry says that colds have been very general, but not so heavy
as he has very often known them in November.
The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very
different from almost all the rest.
Wingfield thinks the vicinity of
Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air.”

“Ah! my dear, it is not like Hartfield.
You make the best of it—but
after you have been a week at Hartfield, you are all of you different
creatures; you do not look like the same.
Knightley looking ill,” turning her eyes with
affectionate anxiety towards her husband.

“Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you.
Graham’s intending to have a bailiff
from Scotland, to look after his new estate.
What will it answer?
Will
not the old prejudice be too strong?”

And she talked in this way so long and successfully that, when forced
to give her attention again to her father and sister, she had nothing
worse to hear than Isabella’s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax; and Jane
Fairfax, though no great favourite with her in general, she was at that
moment very happy to assist in praising.

“That sweet, amiable Jane Fairfax!” said Mrs.
What happiness it must be to her good old
grandmother and excellent aunt, when she comes to visit them!
Campbell will not be able to part with her at all.
Woodhouse agreed to it all, but added,

“Our little friend Harriet Smith, however, is just such another pretty
kind of young person.
You will like Harriet.
Here was a
dangerous opening.

“Ah!” said Mr.
After an interval of some
minutes, however, he began with,

“I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn,
instead of coming here.”

“But why should you be sorry, sir?—I assure you, it did the children a
great deal of good.”

“And, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it had better not have been
to South End.
Perry was surprized to
hear you had fixed upon South End.”

“I know there is such an idea with many people, but indeed it is quite
a mistake, sir.—We all had our health perfectly well there, never found
the least inconvenience from the mud; and Mr.
A fine open sea, he says, and very pure air.
And,
by what I understand, you might have had lodgings there quite away from
the sea—a quarter of a mile off—very comfortable.
Perry,” said he, in a voice of very strong displeasure, “would do
as well to keep his opinion till it is asked for.
Why does he make it
any business of his, to wonder at what I do?—at my taking my family to
one part of the coast or another?—I may be allowed, I hope, the use of
my judgment as well as Mr.
Perry.—I want his directions no more than
his drugs.” He paused—and growing cooler in a moment, added, with only
sarcastic dryness, “If Mr.
Perry can tell me how to convey a wife and
five children a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greater
expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should be as
willing to prefer Cromer to South End as he could himself.”

“True, true,” cried Mr.
Knightley, with most ready interposition—“very
true.
The only way of proving it, however,
will be to turn to our maps.
I shall see you at the Abbey to-morrow
morning I hope, and then we will look them over, and you shall give me
your opinion.”

Mr.
It was a delightful visit;—perfect, in being much too short.
Weston would take no
denial; they must all dine at Randalls one day;—even Mr.
How they were all to be conveyed, he would have made a difficulty if he
could, but as his son and daughter’s carriage and horses were actually
at Hartfield, he was not able to make more than a simple question on
that head; it hardly amounted to a doubt; nor did it occupy Emma long
to convince him that they might in one of the carriages find room for
Harriet also.
Elton, and Mr.
She was very feverish and had a bad sore throat:
Mrs.
Goddard was full of care and affection, Mr.
Emma sat with her as long as she could, to attend her in Mrs.
Goddard’s
unavoidable absences, and raise her spirits by representing how much
Mr.
Elton’s would be depressed when he knew her state; and left her at
last tolerably comfortable, in the sweet dependence of his having a
most comfortless visit, and of their all missing her very much.
She had
not advanced many yards from Mrs.
John Knightley returning from the daily visit to Donwell, with his two
eldest boys, whose healthy, glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a
country run, and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton
and rice pudding they were hastening home for.
Indeed you should take care of
yourself as well as of your friend.
Why does not Perry see her?”

Emma, who was not really at all frightened herself, tranquillised this
excess of apprehension by assurances of Mrs.
Goddard’s experience and
care; but as there must still remain a degree of uneasiness which she
could not wish to reason away, which she would rather feed and assist
than not, she added soon afterwards—as if quite another subject,

“It is so cold, so very cold—and looks and feels so very much like
snow, that if it were to any other place or with any other party, I
should really try not to go out to-day—and dissuade my father from
venturing; but as he has made up his mind, and does not seem to feel
the cold himself, I do not like to interfere, as I know it would be so
great a disappointment to Mr. and Mrs.
Elton, in your case, I should certainly excuse myself.
You appear to me
a little hoarse already, and when you consider what demand of voice and
what fatigues to-morrow will bring, I think it would be no more than
common prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself to-night.”

Mr.
Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make;
which was exactly the case; for though very much gratified by the kind
care of such a fair lady, and not liking to resist any advice of her’s,
he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit;—but Emma,
too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear
him impartially, or see him with clear vision, was very well satisfied
with his muttering acknowledgment of its being “very cold, certainly
very cold,” and walked on, rejoicing in having extricated him from
Randalls, and secured him the power of sending to inquire after Harriet
every hour of the evening.

“You do quite right,” said she;—“we will make your apologies to Mr. and
Mrs.
Elton actually accepting the offer with much prompt
satisfaction.
It was a done thing; Mr.
After a few minutes of entire silence between them, John Knightley
began with—

“I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr.
Elton.
With
men he can be rational and unaffected, but when he has ladies to
please, every feature works.”

“Mr.
Elton as one cannot but
value.”

“Yes,” said Mr.
Elton’s object?”

“Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma; and if it never
occurred to you before, you may as well take it into consideration
now.”

“Mr.
Elton in love with me!—What an idea!”

“I do not say it is so; but you will do well to consider whether it is
so or not, and to regulate your behaviour accordingly.
I speak as a friend, Emma.
Mr.
Elton and I
are very good friends, and nothing more;” and she walked on, amusing
herself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a
partial knowledge of circumstances, of the mistakes which people of
high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into; and not very
well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind and ignorant, and
in want of counsel.
The cold, however, was
severe; and by the time the second carriage was in motion, a few flakes
of snow were finding their way down, and the sky had the appearance of
being so overcharged as to want only a milder air to produce a very
white world in a very short time.
The
preparing and the going abroad in such weather, with the sacrifice of
his children after dinner, were evils, were disagreeables at least,
which Mr.
John Knightley did not by any means like; he anticipated
nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase; and the
whole of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him in expressing his
discontent.

“A man,” said he, “must have a very good opinion of himself when he
asks people to leave their own fireside, and encounter such a day as
this, for the sake of coming to see him.
He must think himself a most
agreeable fellow; I could not do such a thing.
It is the greatest
absurdity—Actually snowing at this moment!—The folly of not allowing
people to be comfortable at home—and the folly of people’s not staying
comfortably at home when they can!
She allowed him to
talk, and arranged the glasses, and wrapped herself up, without opening
her lips.
Elton, spruce, black, and smiling, was with them instantly.
Emma
thought with pleasure of some change of subject.
Mr.
Goddard’s,” said she presently, “was not so
pleasant as I had hoped—‘Not better’ was _my_ answer.”

His face lengthened immediately; and his voice was the voice of
sentiment as he answered.

“Oh! no—I am grieved to find—I was on the point of telling you that
when I called at Mrs.
Perry has been with her, as you
probably heard.”

“Yes—I imagined—that is—I did not—”

“He has been used to her in these complaints, and I hope to-morrow
morning will bring us both a more comfortable report.
But it is
impossible not to feel uneasiness.
Such a sad loss to our party
to-day!”

“Dreadful!—Exactly so, indeed.—She will be missed every moment.”

This was very proper; the sigh which accompanied it was really
estimable; but it should have lasted longer.
Emma was rather in dismay
when only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things,
and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment.

“What an excellent device,” said he, “the use of a sheepskin for
carriages.
How very comfortable they make it;—impossible to feel cold
with such precautions.
The contrivances of modern days indeed have
rendered a gentleman’s carriage perfectly complete.
One is so fenced
and guarded from the weather, that not a breath of air can find its way
unpermitted.
Elton. “Quite seasonable; and
extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not begin
yesterday, and prevent this day’s party, which it might very possibly
have done, for Mr.
Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there been
much snow on the ground; but now it is of no consequence.
This is quite
the season indeed for friendly meetings.
I went for only one night, and could not
get away till that very day se’nnight.”

Mr.
Elton’s spirits for other feelings.
Weston;—Mrs.
Weston’s dining-room does not accommodate more than ten
comfortably; and for my part, I would rather, under such circumstances,
fall short by two than exceed by two.
I think you will agree with me,
(turning with a soft air to Emma,) I think I shall certainly have your
approbation, though Mr.
Knightley perhaps, from being used to the large
parties of London, may not quite enter into our feelings.”

“I know nothing of the large parties of London, sir—I never dine with
any body.”

“Indeed! (in a tone of wonder and pity,) I had no idea that the law had
been so great a slavery.
Well, sir, the time must come when you will be
paid for all this, when you will have little labour and great
enjoyment.”

“My first enjoyment,” replied John Knightley, as they passed through
the sweep-gate, “will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again.”




CHAPTER XIV


Some change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as they
walked into Mrs.
Weston’s drawing-room;—Mr.
Elton must compose his
joyous looks, and Mr.
John Knightley disperse his ill-humour.
Mr.
John Knightley more, to fit them for the
place.—Emma only might be as nature prompted, and shew herself just as
happy as she was.
To her it was real enjoyment to be with the Westons.
Mr.
Weston was a great favourite, and there was not a creature in the
world to whom she spoke with such unreserve, as to his wife; not any
one, to whom she related with such conviction of being listened to and
understood, of being always interesting and always intelligible, the
little affairs, arrangements, perplexities, and pleasures of her father
and herself.
She could tell nothing of Hartfield, in which Mrs.
Weston
had not a lively concern; and half an hour’s uninterrupted
communication of all those little matters on which the daily happiness
of private life depends, was one of the first gratifications of each.
Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice was
grateful to Emma, and she determined to think as little as possible of
Mr.
Elton’s oddities, or of any thing else unpleasant, and enjoy all
that was enjoyable to the utmost.
Weston, who had been
almost wholly engrossed by her attentions to him, was able to turn away
and welcome her dear Emma.
Emma’s project of forgetting Mr.
Instead of forgetting
him, his behaviour was such that she could not avoid the internal
suggestion of “Can it really be as my brother imagined? can it be
possible for this man to be beginning to transfer his affections from
Harriet to me?—Absurd and insufferable!”—Yet he would be so anxious for
her being perfectly warm, would be so interested about her father, and
so delighted with Mrs.
For her own sake she could not be rude; and for
Harriet’s, in the hope that all would yet turn out right, she was even
positively civil; but it was an effort; especially as something was
going on amongst the others, in the most overpowering period of Mr.
Weston was giving some information about his
son; she heard the words “my son,” and “Frank,” and “my son,” repeated
several times over; and, from a few other half-syllables very much
suspected that he was announcing an early visit from his son; but
before she could quiet Mr.
Elton, the subject was so completely past
that any reviving question from her would have been awkward.
Frank
Churchill, which always interested her.
She had frequently
thought—especially since his father’s marriage with Miss Taylor—that if
she _were_ to marry, he was the very person to suit her in age,
character and condition.
She could not but suppose it to be a
match that every body who knew them must think of.
That Mr. and Mrs.
Elton’s civilities were dreadfully ill-timed;
but she had the comfort of appearing very polite, while feeling very
cross—and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possibly
pass without bringing forward the same information again, or the
substance of it, from the open-hearted Mr.
Elton, and seated by Mr.
Weston, at
dinner, he made use of the very first interval in the cares of
hospitality, the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton, to say
to her,

“We want only two more to be just the right number.
I believe you did not
hear me telling the others in the drawing-room that we are expecting
Frank.
Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making their
party quite complete.

“He has been wanting to come to us,” continued Mr.
Weston, “ever since
September: every letter has been full of it; but he cannot command his
own time.
She does not depend upon his coming so much as I do: but she does not
know the parties so well as I do.
If
they are not put off, he cannot stir.
But I know they will, because it
is a family that a certain lady, of some consequence, at Enscombe, has
a particular dislike to: and though it is thought necessary to invite
them once in two or three years, they always are put off when it comes
to the point.
I have not the smallest doubt of the issue.
I am as
confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January, as I am of
being here myself: but your good friend there (nodding towards the
upper end of the table) has so few vagaries herself, and has been so
little used to them at Hartfield, that she cannot calculate on their
effects, as I have been long in the practice of doing.”

“I am sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case,” replied
Emma; “but am disposed to side with you, Mr.
If you think he
will come, I shall think so too; for you know Enscombe.”

“Yes—I have some right to that knowledge; though I have never been at
the place in my life.—She is an odd woman!—But I never allow myself to
speak ill of her, on Frank’s account; for I do believe her to be very
fond of him.
And it is no small credit, in my opinion, to him,
that he should excite such an affection; for, though I would not say it
to any body else, she has no more heart than a stone to people in
general; and the devil of a temper.”

Emma liked the subject so well, that she began upon it, to Mrs.
I am very much afraid that it will all end in nothing.
Mr.
Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world.”

“My Emma!” replied Mrs.
Frank Churchill, in my opinion, as his father
thinks.
Churchill rules at Enscombe, and is a very odd-tempered
woman; and his coming now, depends upon her being willing to spare
him.”

“Oh, Mrs.
Churchill; every body knows Mrs.
It is what we happily have never known any
thing of; but it must be a life of misery.
What a blessing, that she
never had any children!
Poor little creatures, how unhappy she would
have made them!”

Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs.
Weston.
She should then have
heard more: Mrs.
Weston would speak to her, with a degree of unreserve
which she would not hazard with Isabella; and, she really believed,
would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchills from
her, excepting those views on the young man, of which her own
imagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge.
But at
present there was nothing more to be said.
Mr.
Woodhouse very soon
followed them into the drawing-room.
To be sitting long after dinner,
was a confinement that he could not endure.
While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found an opportunity of
saying,

“And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any means
certain.
I am sorry for it.
Even
if this family, the Braithwaites, are put off, I am still afraid that
some excuse may be found for disappointing us.
They are
jealous even of his regard for his father.
Now, according to my idea of Mrs.
Churchill, it would be most natural,
that while she makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband, to
whom she owes every thing, while she exercises incessant caprice
towards _him_, she should frequently be governed by the nephew, to whom
she owes nothing at all.”

“My dearest Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet temper, to understand
a bad one, or to lay down rules for it: you must let it go its own way.
I have no doubt of his having, at times, considerable influence; but it
may be perfectly impossible for him to know beforehand _when_ it will
be.”

Emma listened, and then coolly said, “I shall not be satisfied, unless
he comes.”

“He may have a great deal of influence on some points,” continued Mrs.
Woodhouse was soon ready for his tea; and when he had drank his tea
he was quite ready to go home; and it was as much as his three
companions could do, to entertain away his notice of the lateness of
the hour, before the other gentlemen appeared.
Elton, in
very good spirits, was one of the first to walk in.
He joined them immediately, and,
with scarcely an invitation, seated himself between them.
Frank Churchill, was willing to forget his late
improprieties, and be as well satisfied with him as before, and on his
making Harriet his very first subject, was ready to listen with most
friendly smiles.
She was vexed.
He turned to Mrs.
He could not be satisfied without a
promise—would not she give him her influence in procuring it?”

“So scrupulous for others,” he continued, “and yet so careless for
herself!
She could only give him a look; but it was such a look as she
thought must restore him to his senses, and then left the sofa,
removing to a seat by her sister, and giving her all her attention.
She had not time to know how Mr.
Woodhouse:

“This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements, sir.
Weston and
Emma tried earnestly to cheer him and turn his attention from his
son-in-law, who was pursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly.

“I admired your resolution very much, sir,” said he, “in venturing out
in such weather, for of course you saw there would be snow very soon.
I admired your spirit;
and I dare say we shall get home very well.
Another hour or two’s snow
can hardly make the road impassable; and we are two carriages; if one
is blown over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the
other at hand.
I dare say we shall be all safe at Hartfield before
midnight.”

Mr.
Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was confessing that he
had known it to be snowing some time, but had not said a word, lest it
should make Mr.
Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse for his
hurrying away.
He wished the road might be impassable,
that he might be able to keep them all at Randalls; and with the utmost
good-will was sure that accommodation might be found for every body,
calling on his wife to agree with him, that with a little contrivance,
every body might be lodged, which she hardly knew how to do, from the
consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house.

“What is to be done, my dear Emma?—what is to be done?” was Mr.
I am not at
all afraid.
I could change my
shoes, you know, the moment I got home; and it is not the sort of thing
that gives me cold.”

“Indeed!” replied he. “Then, my dear Isabella, it is the most
extraordinary sort of thing in the world, for in general every thing
does give you cold.
Walk home!—you are prettily shod for walking home,
I dare say.
Weston for her approbation of the plan.
Mrs.
Weston could only approve.
Knightley, who had
left the room immediately after his brother’s first report of the snow,
came back again, and told them that he had been out of doors to
examine, and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty
in their getting home, whenever they liked it, either now or an hour
hence.
He had seen the coachmen, and they both agreed with
him in there being nothing to apprehend.
He was satisfied of there being no present danger in
returning home, but no assurances could convince him that it was safe
to stay; and while the others were variously urging and recommending,
Mr.
The carriage came: and Mr.
Knightley and Mr.
Weston; but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of
alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallen, and the
discovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for. “He was
afraid they should have a very bad drive.
They must keep as much together
as they could;” and James was talked to, and given a charge to go very
slow and wait for the other carriage.
Elton, that the door was to be lawfully shut on them,
and that they were to have a tête-à-tête drive.
But now, she would rather it had not happened.
She believed he had
been drinking too much of Mr.
Weston’s good wine, and felt sure that he
would want to be talking nonsense.
To restrain him as much as might be, by her own manners, she was
immediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of
the weather and the night; but scarcely had she begun, scarcely had
they passed the sweep-gate and joined the other carriage, than she
found her subject cut up—her hand seized—her attention demanded, and
Mr.
Elton actually making violent love to her: availing himself of the
precious opportunity, declaring sentiments which must be already well
known, hoping—fearing—adoring—ready to die if she refused him; but
flattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled love and
unexampled passion could not fail of having some effect, and in short,
very much resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as possible.
It
really was so.
She tried to stop him; but vainly; he would go on, and say
it all.
She felt that half this folly must
be drunkenness, and therefore could hope that it might belong only to
the passing hour.
Accordingly, with a mixture of the serious and the
playful, which she hoped would best suit his half and half state, she
replied,

“I am very much astonished, Mr.
This to _me_! you forget
yourself—you take me for my friend—any message to Miss Smith I shall be
happy to deliver; but no more of this to _me_, if you please.”

“Miss Smith!—message to Miss Smith!—What could she possibly mean!”—And
he repeated her words with such assurance of accent, such boastful
pretence of amazement, that she could not help replying with quickness,

“Mr.
Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct! and I can account
for it only in one way; you are not yourself, or you could not speak
either to me, or of Harriet, in such a manner.
Elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits, not at
all to confuse his intellects.
He perfectly knew his own meaning; and
having warmly protested against her suspicion as most injurious, and
slightly touched upon his respect for Miss Smith as her friend,—but
acknowledging his wonder that Miss Smith should be mentioned at all,—he
resumed the subject of his own passion, and was very urgent for a
favourable answer.
Elton, my astonishment is much beyond any thing I can
express.
Elton, “what can be the meaning of this?—Miss
Smith!—I never thought of Miss Smith in the whole course of my
existence—never paid her any attentions, but as your friend: never
cared whether she were dead or alive, but as your friend.
I have thought only of
you.
Every thing that I have said or done, for many weeks past, has
been with the sole view of marking my adoration of yourself.
No!—(in an accent meant to be
insinuating)—I am sure you have seen and understood me.”

It would be impossible to say what Emma felt, on hearing this—which of
all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost.
She was too completely
overpowered to be immediately able to reply: and two moments of silence
being ample encouragement for Mr.
It confesses that you have long understood me.”

“No, sir,” cried Emma, “it confesses no such thing.
So far from having
long understood you, I have been in a most complete error with respect
to your views, till this moment.
As to myself, I am very sorry that you
should have been giving way to any feelings—Nothing could be farther
from my wishes—your attachment to my friend Harriet—your pursuit of
her, (pursuit, it appeared,) gave me great pleasure, and I have been
very earnestly wishing you success: but had I supposed that she were
not your attraction to Hartfield, I should certainly have thought you
judged ill in making your visits so frequent.
I need not so totally despair of an equal
alliance, as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith!—No, madam, my
visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only; and the encouragement
I received—”

“Encouragement!—I give you encouragement!—Sir, you have been entirely
mistaken in supposing it.
I am exceedingly sorry: but it is well that the mistake
ends where it does.
Had the same behaviour continued, Miss Smith might
have been led into a misconception of your views; not being aware,
probably, any more than myself, of the very great inequality which you
are so sensible of.
John Knightley, ashamed of his ill-humour, was now all kindness and
attention; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort of her
father, as to seem—if not quite ready to join him in a basin of
gruel—perfectly sensible of its being exceedingly wholesome; and the
day was concluding in peace and comfort to all their little party,
except herself.—But her mind had never been in such perturbation; and
it needed a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful till
the usual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quiet
reflection.
CHAPTER XVI


The hair was curled, and the maid sent away, and Emma sat down to think
and be miserable.—It was a wretched business indeed!—Such an overthrow
of every thing she had been wishing for!—Such a development of every
thing most unwelcome!—Such a blow for Harriet!—that was the worst of
all.
He might have doubled his presumption to me—but poor
Harriet!”

How she could have been so deceived!—He protested that he had never
thought seriously of Harriet—never!
She had taken up the idea, she
supposed, and made every thing bend to it.
His manners, however, must
have been unmarked, wavering, dubious, or she could not have been so
misled.
The picture!—How eager he had been about the picture!—and the
charade!—and an hundred other circumstances;—how clearly they had
seemed to point at Harriet.
Certainly she had often, especially of late, thought his manners to
herself unnecessarily gallant; but it had passed as his way, as a mere
error of judgment, of knowledge, of taste, as one proof among others
that he had not always lived in the best society, that with all the
gentleness of his address, true elegance was sometimes wanting; but,
till this very day, she had never, for an instant, suspected it to mean
any thing but grateful respect to her as Harriet’s friend.
To Mr.
There was no denying
that those brothers had penetration.
Elton, the caution he had given, the
conviction he had professed that Mr.
Elton would never marry
indiscreetly; and blushed to think how much truer a knowledge of his
character had been there shewn than any she had reached herself.
It was
dreadfully mortifying; but Mr.
His professions and his
proposals did him no service.
She thought nothing of his attachment,
and was insulted by his hopes.
He wanted to marry well, and having the
arrogance to raise his eyes to her, pretended to be in love; but she
was perfectly easy as to his not suffering any disappointment that need
be cared for.
She need not trouble herself to pity him.
He only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself; and if Miss Woodhouse
of Hartfield, the heiress of thirty thousand pounds, were not quite so
easily obtained as he had fancied, he would soon try for Miss Somebody
else with twenty, or with ten.
Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he was her
inferior in talent, and all the elegancies of mind.
The very want of
such equality might prevent his perception of it; but he must know that
in fortune and consequence she was greatly his superior.
He must know
that the Woodhouses had been settled for several generations at
Hartfield, the younger branch of a very ancient family—and that the
Eltons were nobody.
Elton, in fancying himself a very decided favourite.
If _she_ had so misinterpreted his feelings, she had little right to
wonder that _he_, with self-interest to blind him, should have mistaken
hers.
The first error and the worst lay at her door.
It
was adventuring too far, assuming too much, making light of what ought
to be serious, a trick of what ought to be simple.
She might never have thought of him but for
me; and certainly never would have thought of him with hope, if I had
not assured her of his attachment, for she is as modest and humble as I
used to think him.
Oh! that I had been satisfied with persuading her
not to accept young Martin.
I have been but half a friend to her; and if she were _not_ to feel
this disappointment so very much, I am sure I have not an idea of any
body else who would be at all desirable for her;—William Coxe—Oh! no, I
could not endure William Coxe—a pert young lawyer.”

She stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse, and then resumed a
more serious, more dispiriting cogitation upon what had been, and might
be, and must be.
To youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma’s, though under temporary
gloom at night, the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of
spirits.
Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had gone
to bed, more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her, and to
depend on getting tolerably out of it.
The weather was most favourable for her; though Christmas Day, she
could not go to church.
Woodhouse would have been miserable had his
daughter attempted it, and she was therefore safe from either exciting
or receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas.
No
intercourse with Harriet possible but by note; no church for her on
Sunday any more than on Christmas Day; and no need to find excuses for
Mr.
Elton’s absenting himself.
It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home; and
though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some
society or other, it was very pleasant to have her father so well
satisfied with his being all alone in his own house, too wise to stir
out; and to hear him say to Mr.
Mr.
Knightley, why do not you stay at home like poor Mr.
Elton?”

These days of confinement would have been, but for her private
perplexities, remarkably comfortable, as such seclusion exactly suited
her brother, whose feelings must always be of great importance to his
companions; and he had, besides, so thoroughly cleared off his
ill-humour at Randalls, that his amiableness never failed him during
the rest of his stay at Hartfield.
The
weather soon improved enough for those to move who must move; and Mr.
Woodhouse having, as usual, tried to persuade his daughter to stay
behind with all her children, was obliged to see the whole party set
off, and return to his lamentations over the destiny of poor
Isabella;—which poor Isabella, passing her life with those she doated
on, full of their merits, blind to their faults, and always innocently
busy, might have been a model of right feminine happiness.
Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, with
Mr.
Elton’s best compliments, “that he was proposing to leave Highbury
the following morning in his way to Bath; where, in compliance with the
pressing entreaties of some friends, he had engaged to spend a few
weeks, and very much regretted the impossibility he was under, from
various circumstances of weather and business, of taking a personal
leave of Mr.
Woodhouse any commands, should be
happy to attend to them.”

Emma was most agreeably surprized.—Mr.
She admired him for contriving
it, though not able to give him much credit for the manner in which it
was announced.
Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than
in a civility to her father, from which she was so pointedly excluded.
Woodhouse
talked over his alarms, and Emma was in spirits to persuade them away
with all her usual promptitude.
Goddard’s accordingly the very next day, to undergo the necessary
penance of communication; and a severe one it was.—She had to destroy
all the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding—to appear in
the ungracious character of the one preferred—and acknowledge herself
grossly mistaken and mis-judging in all her ideas on one subject, all
her observations, all her convictions, all her prophecies for the last
six weeks.
The confession completely renewed her first shame—and the sight of
Harriet’s tears made her think that she should never be in charity with
herself again.
Harriet bore the intelligence very well—blaming nobody—and in every
thing testifying such an ingenuousness of disposition and lowly opinion
of herself, as must appear with particular advantage at that moment to
her friend.
Harriet did not consider herself as having
any thing to complain of.
The affection of such a man as Mr.
Her tears fell abundantly—but her grief was so truly artless, that no
dignity could have made it more respectable in Emma’s eyes—and she
listened to her and tried to console her with all her heart and
understanding—really for the time convinced that Harriet was the
superior creature of the two—and that to resemble her would be more for
her own welfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence
could do.
It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple-minded and
ignorant; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed of
being humble and discreet, and repressing imagination all the rest of
her life.
Her second duty now, inferior only to her father’s claims,
was to promote Harriet’s comfort, and endeavour to prove her own
affection in some better method than by match-making.
She got her to
Hartfield, and shewed her the most unvarying kindness, striving to
occupy and amuse her, and by books and conversation, to drive Mr.
Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being thoroughly done; and she
could suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters in
general, and very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to Mr.
Elton in particular; but it seemed to her reasonable that at Harriet’s
age, and with the entire extinction of all hope, such a progress might
be made towards a state of composure by the time of Mr.
If Mr.
Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as evident and
indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do, she could not
imagine Harriet’s persisting to place her happiness in the sight or the
recollection of him.
They must encounter each
other, and make the best of it.
Harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions at Mrs.
Goddard’s; Mr.
CHAPTER XVIII


Mr.
Weston’s fears were justified in the arrival of a letter of
excuse.
Weston was exceedingly disappointed—much more disappointed, in
fact, than her husband, though her dependence on seeing the young man
had been so much more sober: but a sanguine temper, though for ever
expecting more good than occurs, does not always pay for its hopes by
any proportionate depression.
It soon flies over the present failure,
and begins to hope again.
These feelings rapidly restored his comfort, while Mrs.
Weston, of a
more apprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing but a repetition of
excuses and delays; and after all her concern for what her husband was
to suffer, suffered a great deal more herself.
The acquaintance at present had no charm for her.
Knightley, coolly;
“but I dare say he might come if he would.”

“I do not know why you should say so.
He wishes exceedingly to come;
but his uncle and aunt will not spare him.”

“I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming, if he made a
point of it.
It is too unlikely, for me to believe it without proof.”

“How odd you are!
What has Mr.
Frank Churchill done, to make you
suppose him such an unnatural creature?”

“I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature, in suspecting
that he may have learnt to be above his connexions, and to care very
little for any thing but his own pleasure, from living with those who
have always set him the example of it.
If Frank Churchill had wanted to see his father, he would have
contrived it between September and January.
A man at his age—what is
he?—three or four-and-twenty—cannot be without the means of doing as
much as that.
It is impossible.”

“That’s easily said, and easily felt by you, who have always been your
own master.
Knightley, of the
difficulties of dependence.
We know, on the contrary, that he has so
much of both, that he is glad to get rid of them at the idlest haunts
in the kingdom.
We hear of him for ever at some watering-place or
other.
A little while ago, he was at Weymouth.
This proves that he can
leave the Churchills.”

“Yes, sometimes he can.”

“And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while; whenever
there is any temptation of pleasure.”

“It is very unfair to judge of any body’s conduct, without an intimate
knowledge of their situation.
Nobody, who has not been in the interior
of a family, can say what the difficulties of any individual of that
family may be.
Churchill’s temper, before we pretend to decide upon what her nephew
can do.
He may, at times, be able to do a great deal more than he can
at others.”

“There is one thing, Emma, which a man can always do, if he chuses, and
that is, his duty; not by manoeuvring and finessing, but by vigour and
resolution.
He knows it to be so, by his promises and messages; but if he
wished to do it, it might be done.
I know he would be hurt by my
failing in such a mark of respect to him on the present occasion.
Such language for a young man entirely dependent, to
use!—Nobody but you, Mr.
Mr.
Respect for right conduct is felt by every body.
If he would act in
this sort of manner, on principle, consistently, regularly, their
little minds would bend to his.”

“I rather doubt that.
You are very fond of bending little minds; but
where little minds belong to rich people in authority, I think they
have a knack of swelling out, till they are quite as unmanageable as
great ones.
Knightley, were
to be transported and placed all at once in Mr.
I can allow for
the fears of the child, but not of the man.
He ought to have opposed the first attempt on their
side to make him slight his father.
I have not the least idea of his being a weak young man:
I feel sure that he is not.
Mr.
I dare say he has; and though it may cut him off from some
advantages, it will secure him many others.”

“Yes; all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to move, and of
leading a life of mere idle pleasure, and fancying himself extremely
expert in finding excuses for it.
He can sit down and write a fine
flourishing letter, full of professions and falsehoods, and persuade
himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of
preserving peace at home and preventing his father’s having any right
to complain.
They hardly can satisfy a
woman of her good sense and quick feelings: standing in a mother’s
place, but without a mother’s affection to blind her.
It is on her
account that attention to Randalls is doubly due, and she must doubly
feel the omission.
Had she been a person of consequence herself, he
would have come I dare say; and it would not have signified whether he
did or no.
Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of
considerations?
Do you suppose she does not often say all this to
herself?
No, Emma, your amiable young man can be amiable only in
French, not in English.
He may be very ‘amiable,’ have very good
manners, and be very agreeable; but he can have no English delicacy
towards the feelings of other people: nothing really amiable about
him.”

“You seem determined to think ill of him.”

“Me!—not at all,” replied Mr.
We do not often look upon fine young men, well-bred and
agreeable.
Knightley, what a _sensation_ his
coming will produce?
There will be but one subject throughout the
parishes of Donwell and Highbury; but one interest—one object of
curiosity; it will be all Mr.
Frank Churchill; we shall think and speak
of nobody else.”

“You will excuse my being so much over-powered.
If I find him
conversable, I shall be glad of his acquaintance; but if he is only a
chattering coxcomb, he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts.”

“My idea of him is, that he can adapt his conversation to the taste of
every body, and has the power as well as the wish of being universally
agreeable.
To you, he will talk of farming; to me, of drawing or music;
and so on to every body, having that general information on all
subjects which will enable him to follow the lead, or take the lead,
just as propriety may require, and to speak extremely well on each;
that is my idea of him.”

“And mine,” said Mr.
Knightley warmly, “is, that if he turn out any
thing like it, he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing!
What!
at three-and-twenty to be the king of his company—the great man—the
practised politician, who is to read every body’s character, and make
every body’s talents conduce to the display of his own superiority; to
be dispensing his flatteries around, that he may make all appear like
fools compared with himself!
My dear Emma, your own good sense could
not endure such a puppy when it came to the point.”

“I will say no more about him,” cried Emma, “you turn every thing to
evil.
I am not prejudiced.”

“But I am very much, and without being at all ashamed of it.
Knightley, with a degree of vexation, which made Emma immediately
talk of something else, though she could not comprehend why he should
be angry.
VOLUME II




CHAPTER I


Emma and Harriet had been walking together one morning, and, in Emma’s
opinion, had been talking enough of Mr.
She could
not think that Harriet’s solace or her own sins required more; and she
was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they
returned;—but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded,
and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter,
and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive—“Mr.
Elton is so
good to the poor!” she found something else must be done.
They were just approaching the house where lived Mrs. and Miss Bates.
She determined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers.
The house belonged to people in business.
Cole had just been there, just called
in for ten minutes, and had been so good as to sit an hour with them,
and _she_ had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she
liked it very much; and, therefore, she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss
Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too.”

The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by that of Mr.
Elton.
There was intimacy between them, and Mr.
Cole had heard from Mr.
This she had been prepared for when she entered the house; but meant,
having once talked him handsomely over, to be no farther incommoded by
any troublesome topic, and to wander at large amongst all the
Mistresses and Misses of Highbury, and their card-parties.
Elton; but he was
actually hurried off by Miss Bates, she jumped away from him at last
abruptly to the Coles, to usher in a letter from her niece.

“Oh! yes—Mr.
Cole does not know how to shew her
kindness enough; and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any
body can.
And so she began inquiring after her directly, saying, ‘I
know you cannot have heard from Jane lately, because it is not her time
for writing;’ and when I immediately said, ‘But indeed we have, we had
a letter this very morning,’ I do not know that I ever saw any body
more surprized. ‘Have you, upon your honour?’ said she; ‘well, that is
quite unexpected.
Do let me hear what she says.’”

Emma’s politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smiling interest—

“Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately?
I am extremely happy.
I was reading it
to Mrs.
Cole, and since she went away, I was reading it again to my
mother, for it is such a pleasure to her—a letter from Jane—that she
can never hear it often enough; so I knew it could not be far off, and
here it is, only just under my huswife—and since you are so kind as to
wish to hear what she says;—but, first of all, I really must, in
justice to Jane, apologise for her writing so short a letter—only two
pages you see—hardly two—and in general she fills the whole paper and
crosses half.
She often says, when the letter is first opened, ‘Well, Hetty, now I
think you will be put to it to make out all that checker-work’—don’t
you, ma’am?—And then I tell her, I am sure she would contrive to make
it out herself, if she had nobody to do it for her—every word of it—I
am sure she would pore over it till she had made out every word.
It is
such a blessing!
My mother does not hear; she is a little deaf you know.
She was
pondering, in the meanwhile, upon the possibility, without seeming very
rude, of making her escape from Jane Fairfax’s letter, and had almost
resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse, when Miss
Bates turned to her again and seized her attention.

“My mother’s deafness is very trifling you see—just nothing at all.
By
only raising my voice, and saying any thing two or three times over,
she is sure to hear; but then she is used to my voice.
But it is very
remarkable that she should always hear Jane better than she does me.
Jane speaks so distinct!
We never were so long without seeing her before,
and as I was telling Mrs.
Cole, we shall hardly know how to make enough
of her now.”

“Are you expecting Miss Fairfax here soon?”

“Oh yes; next week.”

“Indeed!—that must be a very great pleasure.”

“Thank you.
You are very kind.
I am sure she
will be as happy to see her friends at Highbury, as they can be to see
her.
Yes, Friday or Saturday; she cannot say which, because Colonel
Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days.
That is the reason of her writing out of rule, as we call it; for, in
the common course, we should not have heard from her before next
Tuesday or Wednesday.”

“Yes, so I imagined.
No, we should not have heard, if it had not been
for this particular circumstance, of her being to come here so soon.
The case is, you see, that the Campbells
are going to Ireland.
Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to
come over and see her directly.
They had not intended to go over till
the summer, but she is so impatient to see them again—for till she
married, last October, she was never away from them so much as a week,
which must make it very strange to be in different kingdoms, I was
going to say, but however different countries, and so she wrote a very
urgent letter to her mother—or her father, I declare I do not know
which it was, but we shall see presently in Jane’s letter—wrote in Mr.
Jane has
heard a great deal of its beauty; from Mr.
Campbell were very particular about
their daughter’s not walking out often with only Mr.
Dixon, and the not
going to Ireland, she said, with the insidious design of farther
discovery,

“You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed to
come to you at such a time.
Considering the very particular friendship
between her and Mrs.
But you see, every thing turns out for the best.
Dixon does not seem in the least backward in any attention.
Ever since the service he rendered Jane at
Weymouth, when they were out in that party on the water, and she, by
the sudden whirling round of something or other among the sails, would
have been dashed into the sea at once, and actually was all but gone,
if he had not, with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold of her
habit— (I can never think of it without trembling!)—But ever since we
had the history of that day, I have been so fond of Mr.
Dixon!”

“But, in spite of all her friends’ urgency, and her own wish of seeing
Ireland, Miss Fairfax prefers devoting the time to you and Mrs.
I think they judge wisely.
But Mrs.
Dixon, I understand, has no
remarkable degree of personal beauty; is not, by any means, to be
compared with Miss Fairfax.”

“Oh! no.
You are very obliging to say such things—but certainly not.
There is no comparison between them.
She never
mentioned it before, because she would not alarm us.
Just like her! so
considerate!—But however, she is so far from well, that her kind
friends the Campbells think she had better come home, and try an air
that always agrees with her; and they have no doubt that three or four
months at Highbury will entirely cure her—and it is certainly a great
deal better that she should come here, than go to Ireland, if she is
unwell.
Nobody could nurse her, as we should do.”

“It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world.”

“And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday, and the Campbells
leave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday following—as you will
find from Jane’s letter.
I always make a point of reading Jane’s letters through
to myself first, before I read them aloud to my mother, you know, for
fear of there being any thing in them to distress her.
If Jane does not get well soon, we will call in Mr.
The
expense shall not be thought of; and though he is so liberal, and so
fond of Jane that I dare say he would not mean to charge any thing for
attendance, we could not suffer it to be so, you know.
He has a wife
and family to maintain, and is not to be giving away his time.
I had no
intention, I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes,
when I first entered the house.
Bates; but I have been so
pleasantly detained!
Now, however, we must wish you and Mrs.
CHAPTER II


Jane Fairfax was an orphan, the only child of Mrs.
The marriage of Lieut.
Fairfax of the ——regiment of infantry, and Miss
Jane Bates, had had its day of fame and pleasure, hope and interest;
but nothing now remained of it, save the melancholy remembrance of him
dying in action abroad—of his widow sinking under consumption and grief
soon afterwards—and this girl.
By birth she belonged to Highbury: and when at three years old, on
losing her mother, she became the property, the charge, the
consolation, the foundling of her grandmother and aunt, there had
seemed every probability of her being permanently fixed there; of her
being taught only what very limited means could command, and growing up
with no advantages of connexion or improvement, to be engrafted on what
nature had given her in a pleasing person, good understanding, and
warm-hearted, well-meaning relations.
But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gave a change
to her destiny.
These were claims which
he did not learn to overlook, though some years passed away from the
death of poor Fairfax, before his own return to England put any thing
in his power.
When he did return, he sought out the child and took
notice of her.
It was accepted; and
from that period Jane had belonged to Colonel Campbell’s family, and
had lived with them entirely, only visiting her grandmother from time
to time.
The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others; the
very few hundred pounds which she inherited from her father making
independence impossible.
To provide for her otherwise was out of
Colonel Campbell’s power; for though his income, by pay and
appointments, was handsome, his fortune was moderate and must be all
his daughter’s; but, by giving her an education, he hoped to be
supplying the means of respectable subsistence hereafter.
She had fallen into good hands, known
nothing but kindness from the Campbells, and been given an excellent
education.
Living constantly with right-minded and well-informed
people, her heart and understanding had received every advantage of
discipline and culture; and Colonel Campbell’s residence being in
London, every lighter talent had been done full justice to, by the
attendance of first-rate masters.
Her disposition and abilities were
equally worthy of all that friendship could do; and at eighteen or
nineteen she was, as far as such an early age can be qualified for the
care of children, fully competent to the office of instruction herself;
but she was too much beloved to be parted with.
Neither father nor
mother could promote, and the daughter could not endure it.
The evil
day was put off.
The affection of the whole family, the warm attachment of Miss Campbell
in particular, was the more honourable to each party from the
circumstance of Jane’s decided superiority both in beauty and
acquirements.
With the fortitude of a devoted novitiate, she
had resolved at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice, and retire
from all the pleasures of life, of rational intercourse, equal society,
peace and hope, to penance and mortification for ever.
The good sense of Colonel and Mrs.
As long as they lived, no
exertions would be necessary, their home might be hers for ever; and
for their own comfort they would have retained her wholly; but this
would be selfishness:—what must be at last, had better be soon.
With regard to her not accompanying them to Ireland, her account to her
aunt contained nothing but truth, though there might be some truths not
told.
Certain it was that she
was to come; and that Highbury, instead of welcoming that perfect
novelty which had been so long promised it—Mr.
Frank Churchill—must put
up for the present with Jane Fairfax, who could bring only the
freshness of a two years’ absence.
Emma was sorry;—to have to pay civilities to a person she did not like
through three long months!—to be always doing more than she wished, and
less than she ought!
Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a
difficult question to answer; Mr.
But “she could never
get acquainted with her: she did not know how it was, but there was
such coldness and reserve—such apparent indifference whether she
pleased or not—and then, her aunt was such an eternal talker!—and she
was made such a fuss with by every body!—and it had been always
imagined that they were to be so intimate—because their ages were the
same, every body had supposed they must be so fond of each other.”
These were her reasons—she had no better.
Jane Fairfax was very elegant, remarkably elegant; and she had herself
the highest value for elegance.
Her height was pretty, just such as
almost every body would think tall, and nobody could think very tall;
her figure particularly graceful; her size a most becoming medium,
between fat and thin, though a slight appearance of ill-health seemed
to point out the likeliest evil of the two.
Emma could not but feel all
this; and then, her face—her features—there was more beauty in them
altogether than she had remembered; it was not regular, but it was very
pleasing beauty.
In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane Fairfax with
twofold complacency; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering
justice, and was determining that she would dislike her no longer.
When
she took in her history, indeed, her situation, as well as her beauty;
when she considered what all this elegance was destined to, what she
was going to sink from, how she was going to live, it seemed impossible
to feel any thing but compassion and respect; especially, if to every
well-known particular entitling her to interest, were added the highly
probable circumstance of an attachment to Mr.
Dixon, which she had so
naturally started to herself.
In that case, nothing could be more
pitiable or more honourable than the sacrifices she had resolved on.
Dixon’s
affections from his wife, or of any thing mischievous which her
imagination had suggested at first.
Before she had committed
herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for Jane
Fairfax, or done more towards a recantation of past prejudices and
errors, than saying to Mr.
Knightley, “She certainly is handsome; she
is better than handsome!” Jane had spent an evening at Hartfield with
her grandmother and aunt, and every thing was relapsing much into its
usual state.
Former provocations reappeared.
They had music; Emma was obliged to play; and the
thanks and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an
affectation of candour, an air of greatness, meaning only to shew off
in higher style her own very superior performance.
She was, besides,
which was the worst of all, so cold, so cautious!
There was no getting
at her real opinion.
Dixon’s character, or her own
value for his company, or opinion of the suitableness of the match.
It
was all general approbation and smoothness; nothing delineated or
distinguished.
It did her no service however.
Her caution was thrown
away.
Dixon, perhaps, had been very near changing one friend for the other,
or been fixed only to Miss Campbell, for the sake of the future twelve
thousand pounds.
The like reserve prevailed on other topics.
She and Mr.
Manners were
all that could be safely judged of, under a much longer knowledge than
they had yet had of Mr.
Churchill.
She believed every body found his
manners pleasing.” Emma could not forgive her.
Knightley, who had been of the party, and had
seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side, he was
expressing the next morning, being at Hartfield again on business with
Mr.
He had been used to think her
unjust to Jane, and had now great pleasure in marking an improvement.

“A very pleasant evening,” he began, as soon as Mr.
Woodhouse had been
talked into what was necessary, told that he understood, and the papers
swept away;—“particularly pleasant.
You and Miss Fairfax gave us some
very good music.
I am
sure Miss Fairfax must have found the evening pleasant, Emma.
There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are.
Knightley, nearly at the same time; “you are not often
deficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension.
I
think you understand me, therefore.”

An arch look expressed—“I understand you well enough;” but she said
only, “Miss Fairfax is reserved.”

“I always told you she was—a little; but you will soon overcome all
that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome, all that has its
foundation in diffidence.
What arises from discretion must be
honoured.”

“You think her diffident.
I do not see it.”

“My dear Emma,” said he, moving from his chair into one close by her,
“you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you had not a pleasant
evening.”

“Oh! no; I was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questions;
and amused to think how little information I obtained.”

“I am disappointed,” was his only answer.

“I hope every body had a pleasant evening,” said Mr.
Once, I felt the fire rather too much; but then I
moved back my chair a little, a very little, and it did not disturb me.
However, she is very agreeable, and Mrs.
Bates too, in a different way.
I like old friends; and Miss Jane
Fairfax is a very pretty sort of young lady, a very pretty and a very
well-behaved young lady indeed.
She must have found the evening
agreeable, Mr.
Knightley, because she had Emma.”

“True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax.”

Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for the
present, said, and with a sincerity which no one could question—

“She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one’s eyes
from.
I am always watching her to admire; and I do pity her from my
heart.”

Mr.
Woodhouse, whose
thoughts were on the Bates’s, said—

“It is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined! a
great pity indeed! and I have often wished—but it is so little one can
venture to do—small, trifling presents, of any thing uncommon—Now we
have killed a porker, and Emma thinks of sending them a loin or a leg;
it is very small and delicate—Hartfield pork is not like any other
pork—but still it is pork—and, my dear Emma, unless one could be sure
of their making it into steaks, nicely fried, as ours are fried,
without the smallest grease, and not roast it, for no stomach can bear
roast pork—I think we had better send the leg—do not you think so, my
dear?”

“My dear papa, I sent the whole hind-quarter.
Oh! yes, I always like news.
What is it?—why do you smile
so?—where did you hear it?—at Randalls?”

He had time only to say,

“No, not at Randalls; I have not been near Randalls,” when the door was
thrown open, and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room.
Full
of thanks, and full of news, Miss Bates knew not which to give
quickest.
Mr.
Knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment, and that
not another syllable of communication could rest with him.

“Oh! my dear sir, how are you this morning?
Such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork!
You are
too bountiful!
Have you heard the news?
Elton is going to be
married.”

Emma had not had time even to think of Mr.
Knightley, with a smile which implied a conviction of some part of what
had passed between them.

“But where could _you_ hear it?” cried Miss Bates. “Where could you
possibly hear it, Mr.
Knightley?
For it is not five minutes since I
received Mrs.
Knightley, how could you
possibly have heard it? for the very moment Mr.
Cole of
it, she sat down and wrote to me.
A Miss Hawkins—”

“I was with Mr.
Cole on business an hour and a half ago.
He had just
read Elton’s letter as I was shewn in, and handed it to me directly.”

“Well! that is quite—I suppose there never was a piece of news more
generally interesting.
My dear sir, you really are too bountiful.
My
mother desires her very best compliments and regards, and a thousand
thanks, and says you really quite oppress her.”

“We consider our Hartfield pork,” replied Mr.
We
may well say that ‘our lot is cast in a goodly heritage.’ Well, Mr.
Knightley, and so you actually saw the letter; well—”

“It was short—merely to announce—but cheerful, exulting, of course.”—
Here was a sly glance at Emma. “He had been so fortunate as to—I forget
the precise words—one has no business to remember them.
The information
was, as you state, that he was going to be married to a Miss Hawkins.
He seemed to me very well off as he was.
Jane, you have never seen Mr.
Elton!—no wonder that you have such a
curiosity to see him.”

Jane’s curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly to
occupy her.

“No—I have never seen Mr.
Elton,” she replied, starting on this appeal;
“is he—is he a tall man?”

“Who shall answer that question?” cried Emma. “My father would say
‘yes,’ Mr.
When you have been here a little longer, Miss Fairfax,
you will understand that Mr.
Elton is the standard of perfection in
Highbury, both in person and mind.”

“Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will.
He is the very best young
man—But, my dear Jane, if you remember, I told you yesterday he was
precisely the height of Mr.
Miss Hawkins,—I dare say, an
excellent young woman.
Colonel Campbell, you know, is quite our angel.
Now, here will be Mr.
Elton and Miss Hawkins; and there are the Coles,
such very good people; and the Perrys—I suppose there never was a
happier or a better couple than Mr. and Mrs.
I say, sir,”
turning to Mr.
Woodhouse, “I think there are few places with such
society as Highbury.
He has been gone only four
weeks.”

Nobody had any information to give; and, after a few more wonderings,
Emma said,

“You are silent, Miss Fairfax—but I hope you mean to take an interest
in this news.
You, who have been hearing and seeing so much of late on
these subjects, who must have been so deep in the business on Miss
Campbell’s account—we shall not excuse your being indifferent about Mr.
Elton and Miss Hawkins.”

“When I have seen Mr.
What is before me, I see.
Elton should have aspired—Miss
Woodhouse lets me chatter on, so good-humouredly.
She knows I would not
offend for the world.
How does Miss Smith do?
Have you heard from Mrs.
John Knightley lately?
Oh! those dear
little children.
Dixon like Mr.
I mean in person—tall, and with that sort of look—and
not very talkative.”

“Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all.”

“Very odd! but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand.
One takes up a notion, and runs away with it.
Oh! no—far from it—certainly plain.
The weather
does not look well, and grandmama will be uneasy.
This has been a
most agreeable piece of news indeed.
Cole’s; but I shall not stop three minutes: and, Jane, you had better
go home directly—I would not have you out in a shower!—We think she is
the better for Highbury already.
Thank you, we do indeed.
I shall not
attempt calling on Mrs.
Good morning to you, my dear sir.
Knightley is
coming too.
Well, that is so very!—I am sure if Jane is tired, you will
be so kind as to give her your arm.—Mr.
If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way!—and upon its
beginning to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that the weather would be
detaining her at Mrs.
The shower was heavy, but short; and it had not been over five minutes,
when in came Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look which
hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give; and the “Oh!
Goddard’s half an hour ago—she had
been afraid it would rain—she had been afraid it would pour down every
moment—but she thought she might get to Hartfield first—she had hurried
on as fast as possible; but then, as she was passing by the house where
a young woman was making up a gown for her, she thought she would just
step in and see how it went on; and though she did not seem to stay
half a moment there, soon after she came out it began to rain, and she
did not know what to do; so she ran on directly, as fast as she could,
and took shelter at Ford’s.”—Ford’s was the principal woollen-draper,
linen-draper, and haberdasher’s shop united; the shop first in size and
fashion in the place.—“And so, there she had set, without an idea of
any thing in the world, full ten minutes, perhaps—when, all of a
sudden, who should come in—to be sure it was so very odd!—but they
always dealt at Ford’s—who should come in, but Elizabeth Martin and her
brother!—Dear Miss Woodhouse! only think.
I thought I should have
fainted.
She did not do any of it in the same way that she
used; I could see she was altered; but, however, she seemed to _try_ to
be very friendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some time; but
I know no more what I said—I was in such a tremble!—I remember she said
she was sorry we never met now; which I thought almost too kind!
By that time, it was
beginning to hold up, and I was determined that nothing should stop me
from getting away—and then—only think!—I found he was coming up towards
me too—slowly you know, and as if he did not quite know what to do; and
so he came and spoke, and I answered—and I stood for a minute, feeling
dreadfully, you know, one can’t tell how; and then I took courage, and
said it did not rain, and I must go; and so off I set; and I had not
got three yards from the door, when he came after me, only to say, if I
was going to Hartfield, he thought I had much better go round by Mr.
Cole’s stables, for I should find the near way quite floated by this
rain.
So I
said, I was very much obliged to him: you know I could not do less; and
then he went back to Elizabeth, and I came round by the stables—I
believe I did—but I hardly knew where I was, or any thing about it.
Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, do
talk to me and make me comfortable again.”

Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in
her power.
She was obliged to stop and think.
It was folly to be disturbed
by it.
Ambition, as well as love, had probably been mortified.
They might all
have hoped to rise by Harriet’s acquaintance: and besides, what was the
value of Harriet’s description?—So easily pleased—so little
discerning;—what signified her praise?
She exerted herself, and did try to make her comfortable, by
considering all that had passed as a mere trifle, and quite unworthy of
being dwelt on,

“It might be distressing, for the moment,” said she; “but you seem to
have behaved extremely well; and it is over—and may never—can never, as
a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you need not think about
it.”

Harriet said, “very true,” and she “would not think about it;” but
still she talked of it—still she could talk of nothing else; and Emma,
at last, in order to put the Martins out of her head, was obliged to
hurry on the news, which she had meant to give with so much tender
caution; hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry, ashamed
or only amused, at such a state of mind in poor Harriet—such a
conclusion of Mr.
Elton’s importance with her!
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins’s name was first mentioned in
Highbury, before she was, by some means or other, discovered to have
every recommendation of person and mind; to be handsome, elegant,
highly accomplished, and perfectly amiable: and when Mr.
Elton himself
arrived to triumph in his happy prospects, and circulate the fame of
her merits, there was very little more for him to do, than to tell her
Christian name, and say whose music she principally played.
Elton returned, a very happy man.
The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the usual advantages
of perfect beauty and merit, was in possession of an independent
fortune, of so many thousands as would always be called ten; a point of
some dignity, as well as some convenience: the story told well; he had
not thrown himself away—he had gained a woman of 10,000 _l_. or
thereabouts; and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity—the
first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by
distinguishing notice; the history which he had to give Mrs.
Cole of
the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious—the steps so quick,
from the accidental rencontre, to the dinner at Mr.
Green’s, and the
party at Mrs.
The pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however, must
certainly be lessened by his marriage.
A _Mrs._ _Elton_ would be
an excuse for any change of intercourse; former intimacy might sink
without remark.
Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for
Highbury—handsome enough—to look plain, probably, by Harriet’s side.
On
that article, truth seemed attainable. _What_ she was, must be
uncertain; but _who_ she was, might be found out; and setting aside the
10,000 l., it did not appear that she was at all Harriet’s superior.
She brought no name, no blood, no alliance.
Miss Hawkins was the
youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol—merchant, of course, he must
be called; but, as the whole of the profits of his mercantile life
appeared so very moderate, it was not unfair to guess the dignity of
his line of trade had been very moderate also.
He might be superseded by another; he
certainly would indeed; nothing could be clearer; even a Robert Martin
would have been sufficient; but nothing else, she feared, would cure
her.
And now, poor girl! she was considerably worse from this
reappearance of Mr.
She was always having a glimpse of him
somewhere or other.
Emma saw him only once; but two or three times
every day Harriet was sure _just_ to meet with him, or _just_ to miss
him, _just_ to hear his voice, or see his shoulder, _just_ to have
something occur to preserve him in her fancy, in all the favouring
warmth of surprize and conjecture.
She was, moreover, perpetually
hearing about him; for, excepting when at Hartfield, she was always
among those who saw no fault in Mr.
Elton, and found nothing so
interesting as the discussion of his concerns; and every report,
therefore, every guess—all that had already occurred, all that might
occur in the arrangement of his affairs, comprehending income,
servants, and furniture, was continually in agitation around her.
Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been no pain to her
friend, or reproach to herself, in the waverings of Harriet’s mind,
Emma would have been amused by its variations.
Harriet had
not been at home; but a note had been prepared and left for her,
written in the very style to touch; a small mixture of reproach, with a
great deal of kindness; and till Mr.
Elton himself appeared, she had
been much occupied by it, continually pondering over what could be done
in return, and wishing to do more than she dared to confess.
Elton, in person, had driven away all such cares.
It must not be: and yet the danger of a renewal of the
acquaintance—!
After much thinking, she could determine on nothing better, than
Harriet’s returning the visit; but in a way that, if they had
understanding, should convince them that it was to be only a formal
acquaintance.
CHAPTER V


Small heart had Harriet for visiting.
Only half an hour before her
friend called for her at Mrs.
Goddard’s, her evil stars had led her to
the very spot where, at that moment, a trunk, directed to _The Rev.
She went, however; and when they reached the farm, and she was to be
put down, at the end of the broad, neat gravel walk, which led between
espalier apple-trees to the front door, the sight of every thing which
had given her so much pleasure the autumn before, was beginning to
revive a little local agitation; and when they parted, Emma observed
her to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity, which
determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed quarter of
an hour.
The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again;
and Miss Smith receiving her summons, was with her without delay, and
unattended by any alarming young man.
Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account.
She was
feeling too much; but at last Emma collected from her enough to
understand the sort of meeting, and the sort of pain it was creating.
She had seen only Mrs.
Martin’s saying, all of a sudden, that she thought Miss Smith was
grown, had brought on a more interesting subject, and a warmer manner.
The style of the visit, and
the shortness of it, were then felt to be decisive.
Fourteen minutes to
be given to those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six
months ago!—Emma could not but picture it all, and feel how justly they
might resent, how naturally Harriet must suffer.
It was a bad business.
She would have given a great deal, or endured a great deal, to have had
the Martins in a higher rank of life.
They must be
separated; but there was a great deal of pain in the process—so much to
herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity of a little
consolation, and resolved on going home by way of Randalls to procure
it.
Her mind was quite sick of Mr.
The
refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary.
Presently the
carriage stopt; she looked up; it was stopt by Mr. and Mrs.
Weston, who
were standing to speak to her.
Weston immediately accosted her with,

“How d’ye do?—how d’ye do?—We have been sitting with your father—glad
to see him so well.
Frank comes to-morrow—I had a letter this
morning—we see him to-morrow by dinner-time to a certainty—he is at
Oxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight; I knew it would be
so.
If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days; I
was always glad he did not come at Christmas; now we are going to have
just the right weather for him, fine, dry, settled weather.
Weston’s, confirmed as it all was
by the words and the countenance of his wife, fewer and quieter, but
not less to the purpose.
To know that _she_ thought his coming certain
was enough to make Emma consider it so, and sincerely did she rejoice
in their joy.
Elton would now be talked of no more.
Mr.
Emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at this speech, from his
wife.

“We had better move on, Mr.
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent, and answer in a
manner that appropriated nothing.

“Think of me to-morrow, my dear Emma, about four o’clock,” was Mrs.
Weston’s quick amendment; and so ended a most satisfactory meeting.
When she looked at the hedges, she thought the elder at least
must soon be coming out; and when she turned round to Harriet, she saw
something like a look of spring, a tender smile even there.

“Will Mr.
Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as Oxford?”—was a
question, however, which did not augur much.
But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once, and Emma
was now in a humour to resolve that they should both come in time.
The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs.
Weston and his son.
They had been arrived only a few
minutes, and Mr.
Weston had scarcely finished his explanation of
Frank’s being a day before his time, and her father was yet in the
midst of his very civil welcome and congratulations, when she appeared,
to have her share of surprize, introduction, and pleasure.
She felt immediately that she
should like him; and there was a well-bred ease of manner, and a
readiness to talk, which convinced her that he came intending to be
acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon must be.
Weston with exultation, “I told you
all that he would be here before the time named.
One cannot creep upon a journey; one cannot help
getting on faster than one has planned; and the pleasure of coming in
upon one’s friends before the look-out begins, is worth a great deal
more than any little exertion it needs.”

“It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it,” said the young
man, “though there are not many houses that I should presume on so far;
but in coming _home_ I felt I might do any thing.”

The word _home_ made his father look on him with fresh complacency.
Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable; the
conviction was strengthened by what followed.
That
he should never have been able to indulge so amiable a feeling before,
passed suspiciously through Emma’s brain; but still, if it were a
falsehood, it was a pleasant one, and pleasantly handled.
His manner
had no air of study or exaggeration.
He did really look and speak as if
in a state of no common enjoyment.
He did not advance a word
of praise beyond what she knew to be thoroughly deserved by Mrs.
Weston I should understand whom I
might praise without any danger of being thought extravagant in my
terms.”

Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from
their knowing each other, which had taken strong possession of her
mind, had ever crossed his; and whether his compliments were to be
considered as marks of acquiescence, or proofs of defiance.
She had no doubt of what Mr.
Weston was often thinking about.
He could
now, without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise, without a
glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest, give way to all
his natural kind-hearted civility in solicitous inquiries after Mr.
A reasonable visit paid, Mr.
He had business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errands
for Mrs.
Do you know any
family of that name?”

“To be sure we do,” cried his father; “Mrs.
True, true, you are acquainted with Miss
Fairfax; I remember you knew her at Weymouth, and a fine girl she is.
What is right to be done
cannot be done too soon.
And, besides, I must give you a hint, Frank;
any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoided.
If you do not call early it will be a slight.”

The son looked convinced.

“I have heard her speak of the acquaintance,” said Emma; “she is a very
elegant young woman.”

He agreed to it, but with so quiet a “Yes,” as inclined her almost to
doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct sort
of elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could be thought
only ordinarily gifted with it.

“If you were never particularly struck by her manners before,” said
she, “I think you will to-day.
You will see her to advantage; see her
and hear her—no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all, for she has
an aunt who never holds her tongue.”

“You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are you?” said Mr.
She is staying here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt, very
worthy people; I have known them all my life.
They will be extremely
glad to see you, I am sure; and one of my servants shall go with you to
shew you the way.”

“My dear sir, upon no account in the world; my father can direct me.”

“But your father is not going so far; he is only going to the Crown,
quite on the other side of the street, and there are a great many
houses; you might be very much at a loss, and it is a very dirty walk,
unless you keep on the footpath; but my coachman can tell you where you
had best cross the street.”

Mr.
Frank Churchill again.
He came with Mrs.
Weston, to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially.
He
had been sitting with her, it appeared, most companionably at home,
till her usual hour of exercise; and on being desired to chuse their
walk, immediately fixed on Highbury.—“He did not doubt there being very
pleasant walks in every direction, but if left to him, he should always
chuse the same.
Weston, stood
for Hartfield; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction
with him.
They were all three walking about
together for an hour or two—first round the shrubberies of Hartfield,
and afterwards in Highbury.
He was delighted with every thing; admired
Hartfield sufficiently for Mr.
Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings.
He
begged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so long, and
which had been the home of his father’s father; and on recollecting
that an old woman who had nursed him was still living, walked in quest
of her cottage from one end of the street to the other; and though in
some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive merit, they
shewed, altogether, a good-will towards Highbury in general, which must
be very like a merit to those he was with.
Their first pause was at the Crown Inn, an inconsiderable house, though
the principal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of post-horses
were kept, more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from any
run on the road; and his companions had not expected to be detained by
any interest excited there; but in passing it they gave the history of
the large room visibly added; it had been built many years ago for a
ball-room, and while the neighbourhood had been in a particularly
populous, dancing state, had been occasionally used as such;—but such
brilliant days had long passed away, and now the highest purpose for
which it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist club established
among the gentlemen and half-gentlemen of the place.
It would hold the
very number for comfort.
They ought to have balls there at least every
fortnight through the winter.
He argued like a
young man very much bent on dancing; and Emma was rather surprized to
see the constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedly against the
habits of the Churchills.
He could be no judge, however,
of the evil he was holding cheap.
It was but an effusion of lively
spirits.
At last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the Crown; and
being now almost facing the house where the Bateses lodged, Emma
recollected his intended visit the day before, and asked him if he had
paid it.

“Yes, oh! yes”—he replied; “I was just going to mention it.
The good lady had not given me the possibility of escape before.”

“And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking?”

“Ill, very ill—that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed to look
ill.
But the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs.
And, seriously, Miss Fairfax is naturally so
pale, as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.—A most
deplorable want of complexion.”

Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm defence of Miss
Fairfax’s complexion. “It was certainly never brilliant, but she would
not allow it to have a sickly hue in general; and there was a softness
and delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance to the character
of her face.” He listened with all due deference; acknowledged that he
had heard many people say the same—but yet he must confess, that to him
nothing could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health.
Where features were indifferent, a fine complexion gave beauty to them
all; and where they were good, the effect was—fortunately he need not
attempt to describe what the effect was.

“Well,” said Emma, “there is no disputing about taste.—At least you
admire her except her complexion.”

He shook his head and laughed.—“I cannot separate Miss Fairfax and her
complexion.”

“Did you see her often at Weymouth?
I do admire your patriotism.
You will
be adored in Highbury.
You were very popular before you came, because
you were Mr.
Weston’s son—but lay out half a guinea at Ford’s, and your
popularity will stand upon your own virtues.”

They went in; and while the sleek, well-tied parcels of “Men’s Beavers”
and “York Tan” were bringing down and displaying on the counter, he
said—“But I beg your pardon, Miss Woodhouse, you were speaking to me,
you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor_
_patriae_.
I assure you the utmost stretch of
public fame would not make me amends for the loss of any happiness in
private life.”

“I merely asked, whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax and her
party at Weymouth.”

“And now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be a
very unfair one.
Miss Fairfax must already have given her account.—I
shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow.”

“Upon my word! you answer as discreetly as she could do herself.
I met her frequently at Weymouth.
I had known the Campbells a
little in town; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set.
Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man, and Mrs.
Weston smiling;
“remember that I am here.—Mr.
I will move a
little farther off.”

“I certainly do forget to think of _her_,” said Emma, “as having ever
been any thing but my friend and my dearest friend.”

He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment.
She appeared to me to play well, that is, with
considerable taste, but I know nothing of the matter myself.—I am
excessively fond of music, but without the smallest skill or right of
judging of any body’s performance.—I have been used to hear her’s
admired; and I remember one proof of her being thought to play well:—a
man, a very musical man, and in love with another woman—engaged to
her—on the point of marriage—would yet never ask that other woman to
sit down to the instrument, if the lady in question could sit down
instead—never seemed to like to hear one if he could hear the other.
That, I thought, in a man of known musical talent, was some proof.”

“Proof indeed!” said Emma, highly amused.—“Mr.
Dixon is very musical,
is he?
I could not excuse a man’s having more music than love—more ear
than eye—a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my feelings.
Dixon!
It was not very flattering to Miss Campbell; but she
really did not seem to feel it.”

“So much the better—or so much the worse:—I do not know which.
But be
it sweetness or be it stupidity in her—quickness of friendship, or
dulness of feeling—there was one person, I think, who must have felt
it: Miss Fairfax herself.
She must have felt the improper and dangerous
distinction.”

“As to that—I do not—”

“Oh! do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax’s
sensations from you, or from any body else.
They are known to no human
being, I guess, but herself.
But you, who have known Miss Fairfax from a child, must be a
better judge of her character, and of how she is likely to conduct
herself in critical situations, than I can be.”

“I have known her from a child, undoubtedly; we have been children and
women together; and it is natural to suppose that we should be
intimate,—that we should have taken to each other whenever she visited
her friends.
But we never did.
One cannot love a reserved person.”

“Not till the reserve ceases towards oneself; and then the attraction
may be the greater.
I have no reason to think
ill of her—not the least—except that such extreme and perpetual
cautiousness of word and manner, such a dread of giving a distinct idea
about any body, is apt to suggest suspicions of there being something
to conceal.”

He perfectly agreed with her: and after walking together so long, and
thinking so much alike, Emma felt herself so well acquainted with him,
that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting.
She was particularly struck by his manner of
considering Mr.
No,
he could not believe it a bad house; not such a house as a man was to
be pitied for having.
If it were to be shared with the woman he loved,
he could not think any man to be pitied for having that house.
But Emma, in her own mind, determined that he _did_ know what he
was talking about, and that he shewed a very amiable inclination to
settle early in life, and to marry, from worthy motives.
It did not
accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation in expense, or even
the unselfish warmth of heart, which she had believed herself to
discern in him yesterday.
Weston,
indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general; he became
liable to all these charges.
Weston did not like it, was
clear enough, by her passing it over as quickly as possible, and making
no other comment than that “all young people would have their little
whims.”

With the exception of this little blot, Emma found that his visit
hitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him.
Mrs.
Weston was
very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he made
himself—how much she saw to like in his disposition altogether.
This was all very promising; and, but for
such an unfortunate fancy for having his hair cut, there was nothing to
denote him unworthy of the distinguished honour which her imagination
had given him; the honour, if not of being really in love with her, of
being at least very near it, and saved only by her own
indifference—(for still her resolution held of never marrying)—the
honour, in short, of being marked out for her by all their joint
acquaintance.
Weston, on his side, added a virtue to the account which must have
some weight.
He gave her to understand that Frank admired her
extremely—thought her very beautiful and very charming; and with so
much to be said for him altogether, she found she must not judge him
harshly.
Weston observed, “all young people would have their
little whims.”

There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not so
leniently disposed.
In general he was judged, throughout the parishes
of Donwell and Highbury, with great candour; liberal allowances were
made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man—one who
smiled so often and bowed so well; but there was one spirit among them
not to be softened, from its power of censure, by bows or smiles—Mr.
Knightley.
On their first coming into the
country, they had lived in proportion to their income, quietly, keeping
little company, and that little unexpensively; but the last year or two
had brought them a considerable increase of means—the house in town had
yielded greater profits, and fortune in general had smiled on them.
With their wealth, their views increased; their want of a larger house,
their inclination for more company.
They added to their house, to their
number of servants, to their expenses of every sort; and by this time
were, in fortune and style of living, second only to the family at
Hartfield.
The Coles were
very respectable in their way, but they ought to be taught that it was
not for them to arrange the terms on which the superior families would
visit them.
Knightley, none of Mr.
Donwell and Randalls had received their
invitation, and none had come for her father and herself; and Mrs.
Weston’s accounting for it with “I suppose they will not take the
liberty with you; they know you do not dine out,” was not quite
sufficient.
She felt that she should like to have had the power of
refusal; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to be assembled
there, consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest to her,
occurred again and again, she did not know that she might not have been
tempted to accept.
Harriet was to be there in the evening, and the
Bateses.
Might not the evening end in a dance? had been a question of
his.
She owned that, considering every thing, she was not absolutely without
inclination for the party.
The Coles expressed themselves so
properly—there was so much real attention in the manner of it—so much
consideration for her father. “They would have solicited the honour
earlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen from
London, which they hoped might keep Mr.
Woodhouse from any draught of
air, and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour
of his company.” Upon the whole, she was very persuadable; and it being
briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without
neglecting his comfort—how certainly Mrs.
Goddard, if not Mrs.
I am sorry Mr. and Mrs.
Weston, “as I took Miss Taylor away, it is
incumbent on me to supply her place, if I can; and I will step to Mrs.
Woodhouse’s agitation.
Weston must be quiet, and every thing deliberately
arranged.
With this treatment, Mr.
Goddard; and Emma should write a line, and invite her.
But first of all, there must be an answer
written to Mrs.
But you will do every thing right.
I need not tell you what is
to be done.
We must remember to let James know that the carriage will
be wanted on Tuesday.
I shall have no fears for you with him.
We have
never been there above once since the new approach was made; but still
I have no doubt that James will take you very safely.
And when you get
there, you must tell him at what time you would have him come for you
again; and you had better name an early hour.
You will not like staying
late.
You will not like the noise.”

“But, my dear sir,” cried Mr.
I should be extremely sorry to be giving them any
pain.
Perry tells me that Mr.
Cole
never touches malt liquor.
You would not think it to look at him, but
he is bilious—Mr.
No, I would not be the means of
giving them any pain.
My dear Emma, we must consider this.
I am sure,
rather than run the risk of hurting Mr. and Mrs.
You will not regard being tired.
You
will be perfectly safe, you know, among your friends.”

“Oh yes, papa.
I have no fears at all for myself; and I should have no
scruples of staying as late as Mrs.
I am
only afraid of your sitting up for me.
You must promise me not to sit
up.”

He did, on the condition of some promises on her side: such as that, if
she came home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly; if
hungry, that she would take something to eat; that her own maid should
sit up for her; and that Serle and the butler should see that every
thing were safe in the house, as usual.
CHAPTER VIII


Frank Churchill came back again; and if he kept his father’s dinner
waiting, it was not known at Hartfield; for Mrs.
He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at himself with a very
good grace, but without seeming really at all ashamed of what he had
done.
He was quite as undaunted and as lively as ever; and, after
seeing him, Emma thus moralised to herself:—

“I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly silly things do
cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent
way.
Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not always folly.—It
depends upon the character of those who handle it.
Knightley, he is
_not_ a trifling, silly young man.
If he were, he would have done this
differently.
He would either have gloried in the achievement, or been
ashamed of it.
There would have been either the ostentation of a
coxcomb, or the evasions of a mind too weak to defend its own
vanities.—No, I am perfectly sure that he is not trifling or silly.”

With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again, and for a
longer time than hitherto; of judging of his general manners, and by
inference, of the meaning of his manners towards herself; of guessing
how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness into her air;
and of fancying what the observations of all those might be, who were
now seeing them together for the first time.
Cole’s; and without being able to forget that among the failings of Mr.
Elton, even in the days of his favour, none had disturbed her more than
his propensity to dine with Mr.
Cole.
Her father’s comfort was amply secured, Mrs.
Bates as well as Mrs.
Goddard being able to come; and her last pleasing duty, before she left
the house, was to pay her respects to them as they sat together after
dinner; and while her father was fondly noticing the beauty of her
dress, to make the two ladies all the amends in her power, by helping
them to large slices of cake and full glasses of wine, for whatever
unwilling self-denial his care of their constitution might have obliged
them to practise during the meal.—She had provided a plentiful dinner
for them; she wished she could know that they had been allowed to eat
it.
She followed another carriage to Mr.
Cole’s door; and was pleased to
see that it was Mr.
Knightley keeping no horses,
having little spare money and a great deal of health, activity, and
independence, was too apt, in Emma’s opinion, to get about as he could,
and not use his carriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey.
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as
with Mr.
Knightley.
She was received with a cordial respect which could
not but please, and given all the consequence she could wish for.
Cox’s family,
the lawyer of Highbury.
Elton were talked over, Emma could
fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her
neighbour.
Cole was telling that
she had been calling on Miss Bates, and as soon as she entered the room
had been struck by the sight of a pianoforte—a very elegant looking
instrument—not a grand, but a large-sized square pianoforte; and the
substance of the story, the end of all the dialogue which ensued of
surprize, and inquiry, and congratulations on her side, and
explanations on Miss Bates’s, was, that this pianoforte had arrived
from Broadwood’s the day before, to the great astonishment of both aunt
and niece—entirely unexpected; that at first, by Miss Bates’s account,
Jane herself was quite at a loss, quite bewildered to think who could
possibly have ordered it—but now, they were both perfectly satisfied
that it could be from only one quarter;—of course it must be from
Colonel Campbell.

“One can suppose nothing else,” added Mrs.
She knows their ways best; but I should not consider their silence as
any reason for their not meaning to make the present.
Cole.

“I declare, I do not know when I have heard any thing that has given me
more satisfaction!—It always has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax, who
plays so delightfully, should not have an instrument.
I rather believe you are giving me more credit for
acuteness than I deserve.
If Colonel Campbell is not the person, who can
be?”

“What do you say to Mrs.
Dixon?”

“Mrs.
I had not thought of Mrs.
It is Mrs.
Dixon.—Very well.
Yes, I immediately perceive that it must be the
joint present of Mr. and Mrs.
Dixon.
We were speaking the other day,
you know, of his being so warm an admirer of her performance.”

“Yes, and what you told me on that head, confirmed an idea which I had
entertained before.—I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentions
of either Mr.
Dixon or Miss Fairfax, but I cannot help suspecting
either that, after making his proposals to her friend, he had the
misfortune to fall in love with _her_, or that he became conscious of a
little attachment on her side.
Good fires and carriages
would be much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health, and
I dare say in her’s.
I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions,
though you make so noble a profession of doing it, but I honestly tell
you what they are.”

“And, upon my word, they have an air of great probability.
Mr.
Did you ever hear of that?—A water party;
and by some accident she was falling overboard.
He caught her.”

“He did.
I was there—one of the party.”

“Were you really?—Well!—But you observed nothing of course, for it
seems to be a new idea to you.—If I had been there, I think I should
have made some discoveries.”

“I dare say you would; but I, simple I, saw nothing but the fact, that
Miss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr.
And though the consequent
shock and alarm was very great and much more durable—indeed I believe
it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable again—yet that
was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be
observable.
I do not mean to say, however, that you might not have made
discoveries.”

The conversation was here interrupted.
They were called on to share in
the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses, and
obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others; but when the
table was again safely covered, when every corner dish was placed
exactly right, and occupation and ease were generally restored, Emma
said,

“The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me.
Depend upon it, we shall
soon hear that it is a present from Mr. and Mrs.
Dixon.”

“And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must
conclude it to come from the Campbells.”

“No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells.
Miss Fairfax knows it is
not from the Campbells, or they would have been guessed at first.
I may not have
convinced you perhaps, but I am perfectly convinced myself that Mr.
Dixon is a principal in the business.”

“Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced.
At first, while I supposed
you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver, I saw it only as
paternal kindness, and thought it the most natural thing in the world.
The conviction
seemed real; he looked as if he felt it.
The ladies had not been long in the drawing-room, before the other
ladies, in their different divisions, arrived.
In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her.
She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte, she felt too much in the
secret herself, to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair,
and therefore purposely kept at a distance; but by the others, the
subject was almost immediately introduced, and she saw the blush of
consciousness with which congratulations were received, the blush of
guilt which accompanied the name of “my excellent friend Colonel
Campbell.”

Mrs.
In he walked, the first and the
handsomest; and after paying his compliments en passant to Miss Bates
and her niece, made his way directly to the opposite side of the
circle, where sat Miss Woodhouse; and till he could find a seat by her,
would not sit at all.
She was his object, and every body must perceive it.
Elton.” Emma restrained her
indignation, and only turned from her in silence.
Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on first
glancing towards Miss Fairfax; but it was most prudent to avoid speech.
He told her that he had been impatient to leave the dining-room—hated
sitting long—was always the first to move when he could—that his
father, Mr.
Cole, were left very busy over
parish business—that as long as he had staid, however, it had been
pleasant enough, as he had found them in general a set of
gentlemanlike, sensible men; and spoke so handsomely of Highbury
altogether—thought it so abundant in agreeable families—that Emma began
to feel she had been used to despise the place rather too much.
She
questioned him as to the society in Yorkshire—the extent of the
neighbourhood about Enscombe, and the sort; and could make out from his
answers that, as far as Enscombe was concerned, there was very little
going on, that their visitings were among a range of great families,
none very near; and that even when days were fixed, and invitations
accepted, it was an even chance that Mrs.
She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury, taken at
its best, might reasonably please a young man who had more retirement
at home than he liked.
His importance at Enscombe was very evident.
One of those points on
which his influence failed, he then mentioned.
He had wanted very much
to go abroad—had been very eager indeed to be allowed to travel—but she
would not hear of it.
The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention, Emma guessed to be
good behaviour to his father.

“I have made a most wretched discovery,” said he, after a short pause.—
“I have been here a week to-morrow—half my time.
I never knew days fly
so fast.
But
just got acquainted with Mrs.
Weston, and others!—I hate the
recollection.”

“Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day, out
of so few, in having your hair cut.”

“No,” said he, smiling, “that is no subject of regret at all.
I have no
pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself fit to be
seen.”

The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herself
obliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr.
Cole.
Cole had moved away, and her attention could be restored as
before, she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room at
Miss Fairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite.

“What is the matter?” said she.
I
see nobody else looking like her!—I must go and ask her whether it is
an Irish fashion.
Shall I?—Yes, I will—I declare I will—and you shall
see how she takes it;—whether she colours.”

He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss
Fairfax, and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady, as
he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly in
front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.
Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs.
Do you know how
Miss Bates and her niece came here?”

“How?—They were invited, were not they?”

“Oh! yes—but how they were conveyed hither?—the manner of their
coming?”

“They walked, I conclude.
Poor girl!
You may
guess how readily he came into my wishes; and having his approbation, I
made my way directly to Miss Bates, to assure her that the carriage
would be at her service before it took us home; for I thought it would
be making her comfortable at once.
Good soul! she was as grateful as
possible, you may be sure. ‘Nobody was ever so fortunate as
herself!’—but with many, many thanks—‘there was no occasion to trouble
us, for Mr.
Knightley’s carriage had brought, and was to take them home
again.’ I was quite surprized;—very glad, I am sure; but really quite
surprized.
He is not a
gallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this, considering Jane
Fairfax’s ill-health, would appear a case of humanity to him;—and for
an act of unostentatious kindness, there is nobody whom I would fix on
more than on Mr.
I know he had horses to-day—for we arrived
together; and I laughed at him about it, but he said not a word that
could betray.”

“Well,” said Mrs.
Weston, smiling, “you give him credit for more
simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do; for while
Miss Bates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head, and I have
never been able to get it out again.
Knightley and Jane Fairfax.
See the consequence of keeping you
company!—What do you say to it?”

“Mr.
I am
amazed that you should think of such a thing.”

“My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it.
I do not
want the match—I do not want to injure dear little Henry—but the idea
has been given me by circumstances; and if Mr.
He has a great regard for
the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax—and is always glad
to shew them attention.
He has no occasion to marry, either to fill up
his time or his heart.”

“My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so; but if he really
loves Jane Fairfax—”

“Nonsense!
In the way of love, I
am sure he does not.
He would do any good to her, or her family; but—”

“Well,” said Mrs.
Weston, laughing, “perhaps the greatest good he could
do them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home.”

“If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself; a
very shameful and degrading connexion.
And, upon my word, I do not think Mr.
Knightley would be
much disturbed by Miss Bates.
But the question is not, whether it
would be a bad connexion for him, but whether he wishes it; and I think
he does.
The interest he takes in her—his anxiety about her
health—his concern that she should have no happier prospect!
I have heard him
say that he could listen to her for ever.
Oh! and I had almost
forgotten one idea that occurred to me—this pianoforte that has been
sent here by somebody—though we have all been so well satisfied to
consider it a present from the Campbells, may it not be from Mr.
Mr.
Knightley does
nothing mysteriously.”

“I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly;
oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common
course of things, occur to him.”

“Very well; and if he had intended to give her one, he would have told
her so.”

“There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma.
I have a very
strong notion that it comes from him.
Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax.”

They combated the point some time longer in the same way; Emma rather
gaining ground over the mind of her friend; for Mrs.
Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do
them the honour of trying it.
Frank Churchill, of whom, in the
eagerness of her conversation with Mrs.
Her pardon was duly begged at the close of the song, and
every thing usual followed.
With mixed feelings, she seated herself at a little distance from the
numbers round the instrument, to listen.
Frank Churchill sang again.
Knightley among the most attentive, soon drew away half
Emma’s mind; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject of
Mrs.
Knightley’s marrying did not in the least subside.
She could see
nothing but evil in it.
A Mrs.
Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell.
Knightley looked back, and came and sat down by her.
They
talked at first only of the performance.
His admiration was certainly
very warm; yet she thought, but for Mrs.
Weston, it would not have
struck her.
As a sort of touchstone, however, she began to speak of his
kindness in conveying the aunt and niece; and though his answer was in
the spirit of cutting the matter short, she believed it to indicate
only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness of his own.

“I often feel concern,” said she, “that I dare not make our carriage
more useful on such occasions.
It is not that I am without the wish;
but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James should
put-to for such a purpose.”

“Quite out of the question, quite out of the question,” he
replied;—“but you must often wish it, I am sure.” And he smiled with
such seeming pleasure at the conviction, that she must proceed another
step.

“This present from the Campbells,” said she—“this pianoforte is very
kindly given.”

“Yes,” he replied, and without the smallest apparent
embarrassment.—“But they would have done better had they given her
notice of it.
Surprizes are foolish things.
The pleasure is not
enhanced, and the inconvenience is often considerable.
I should have
expected better judgment in Colonel Campbell.”

From that moment, Emma could have taken her oath that Mr.
This must not be.” And touching Miss Bates, who at that
moment passed near—“Miss Bates, are you mad, to let your niece sing
herself hoarse in this manner?
Go, and interfere.
They have no mercy on
her.”

Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay even to be
grateful, before she stept forward and put an end to all farther
singing.
Cole,
that every thing was rapidly clearing away, to give proper space.
Mrs.
While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off,
Emma found time, in spite of the compliments she was receiving on her
voice and her taste, to look about, and see what became of Mr.
This would be a trial.
He was no dancer in general.
If he
were to be very alert in engaging Jane Fairfax now, it might augur
something.
Cole.
Not more than
five couple could be mustered; but the rarity and the suddenness of it
made it very delightful, and she found herself well matched in a
partner.
They were a couple worth looking at.
Weston, look sorrowful,
and have done.

“Perhaps it is as well,” said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emma to
her carriage. “I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancing
would not have agreed with me, after yours.”




CHAPTER IX


Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles.
She must have delighted
the Coles—worthy people, who deserved to be made happy!—And left a name
behind her that would not soon die away.
Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common; and there were two
points on which she was not quite easy.
It was hardly right; but it
had been so strong an idea, that it would escape her, and his
submission to all that she told, was a compliment to her penetration,
which made it difficult for her to be quite certain that she ought to
have held her tongue.
The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax; and
there she had no doubt.
She did unfeignedly and unequivocally regret
the inferiority of her own playing and singing.
She was then interrupted by Harriet’s coming in; and if Harriet’s
praise could have satisfied her, she might soon have been comforted.

“Oh! if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!”

“Don’t class us together, Harriet.
My playing is no more like her’s,
than a lamp is like sunshine.”

“Oh! dear—I think you play the best of the two.
I think you play quite
as well as she does.
I am sure I had much rather hear you.
Every body
last night said how well you played.”

“Those who knew any thing about it, must have felt the difference.
The
truth is, Harriet, that my playing is just good enough to be praised,
but Jane Fairfax’s is much beyond it.”

“Well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does, or
that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out.
Mr.
I saw she had execution, but I did not know she had any
taste.
Besides, if she does play so very well, you
know, it is no more than she is obliged to do, because she will have to
teach.
The Coxes were wondering last night whether she would get into
any great family.
Elton.

“They told me—that Mr.
Martin dined with them last Saturday.”

“Oh!”

“He came to their father upon some business, and he asked him to stay
to dinner.”

“Oh!”

“They talked a great deal about him, especially Anne Cox.
I do not know
what she meant, but she asked me if I thought I should go and stay
there again next summer.”

“She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox should
be.”

“She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there.
Perry walking hastily by, Mr.
Cole’s carriage-horses returning from exercise, or a
stray letter-boy on an obstinate mule, were the liveliest objects she
could presume to expect; and when her eyes fell only on the butcher
with his tray, a tidy old woman travelling homewards from shop with her
full basket, two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone, and a string of
dawdling children round the baker’s little bow-window eyeing the
gingerbread, she knew she had no reason to complain, and was amused
enough; quite enough still to stand at the door.
A mind lively and at
ease, can do with seeing nothing, and can see nothing that does not
answer.
They were stopping, however, in the
first place at Mrs.
Bates’s; whose house was a little nearer Randalls
than Ford’s; and had all but knocked, when Emma caught their
eye.—Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her; and the
agreeableness of yesterday’s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure
to the present meeting.
They would be very much pleased.”

“Me!
But, perhaps—I may be equally in the
way here.
Miss Woodhouse looks as if she did not want me.
She will probably have soon done, and then we shall go home.
I shall be no support to Mrs.
She might do very well by herself.
Quite
otherwise indeed, if I understood Miss Fairfax’s opinion last night.”

“Do come with me,” said Mrs.
Bates’s door.
Only my pattern gown is at
Hartfield.
No, you shall send it to Hartfield, if you please.
But then,
Mrs.
But I shall want the ribbon directly—so it had better go
to Hartfield—at least the ribbon.
You could make it into two parcels,
Mrs.
Ford the trouble of two
parcels.”

“No more it is.”

“No trouble in the world, ma’am,” said the obliging Mrs.
To Hartfield,
if you please, Mrs.
Ford.”

“Aye, that will be much best,” said Harriet, quite satisfied, “I should
not at all like to have it sent to Mrs.
Weston
to come with me, that I might be sure of succeeding.”

“I hope Mrs.
Bates and Miss Fairfax are—”

“Very well, I am much obliged to you.
My mother is delightfully well;
and Jane caught no cold last night.
Woodhouse?—I am so glad
to hear such a good account.
Mrs.
At one time
Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping.
Here is the rivet
of your mistress’s spectacles out.
Then the baked apples came home,
Mrs.
Wallis sent them by her boy; they are extremely civil and obliging
to us, the Wallises, always—I have heard some people say that Mrs.
Wallis can be uncivil and give a very rude answer, but we have never
known any thing but the greatest attention from them.
And it cannot be
for the value of our custom now, for what is our consumption of bread,
you know?
I dare not let my mother know how little she
eats—so I say one thing and then I say another, and it passes off.
But
about the middle of the day she gets hungry, and there is nothing she
likes so well as these baked apples, and they are extremely wholesome,
for I took the opportunity the other day of asking Mr.
Patty makes an
excellent apple-dumpling.
I beg your pardon.
I did not see you before.
I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbons from town.
Thank ye, the gloves do very well—only a
little too large about the wrist; but Jane is taking them in.”

“What was I talking of?” said she, beginning again when they were all
in the street.
Emma wondered on what, of all the medley, she would fix.

“I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of.—Oh! my mother’s
spectacles.
So very obliging of Mr.
Indeed I must
say that, much as I had heard of him before and much as I had expected,
he very far exceeds any thing....
Weston,
most warmly.
And when I brought out
the baked apples from the closet, and hoped our friends would be so
very obliging as to take some, ‘Oh!’ said he directly, ‘there is
nothing in the way of fruit half so good, and these are the
finest-looking home-baked apples I ever saw in my life.’ That, you
know, was so very....
Indeed they are very delightful apples, and Mrs.
The apples
themselves are the very finest sort for baking, beyond a doubt; all
from Donwell—some of Mr.
He sends us a
sack every year; and certainly there never was such a keeping apple
anywhere as one of his trees—I believe there is two of them.
William Larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this
year.
And when he was gone, she almost
quarrelled with me—No, I should not say quarrelled, for we never had a
quarrel in our lives; but she was quite distressed that I had owned the
apples were so nearly gone; she wished I had made him believe we had a
great many left.
Oh, said I, my dear, I did say as much as I could.
However, the very same evening William Larkins came over with a large
basket of apples, the same sort of apples, a bushel at least, and I was
very much obliged, and went down and spoke to William Larkins and said
every thing, as you may suppose.
I am always glad to see him.
But, however, I found
afterwards from Patty, that William said it was all the apples of
_that_ sort his master had; he had brought them all—and now his master
had not one left to bake or boil.
William did not seem to mind it
himself, he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many; for
William, you know, thinks more of his master’s profit than any thing;
but Mrs.
She could not bear that her master should not be able to have
another apple-tart this spring.
He told Patty this, but bid her not
mind it, and be sure not to say any thing to us about it, for Mrs.
Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes, and as long as so many sacks were
sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder.
I would not have Mr.
I wanted
to keep it from Jane’s knowledge; but, unluckily, I had mentioned it
before I was aware.”

Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door; and her visitors
walked upstairs without having any regular narration to attend to,
pursued only by the sounds of her desultory good-will.

“Pray take care, Mrs.
Weston, there is a step at the turning.
Pray take
care, Miss Woodhouse, ours is rather a dark staircase—rather darker and
narrower than one could wish.
Miss
Woodhouse, I am quite concerned, I am sure you hit your foot.
Miss
Smith, the step at the turning.”




CHAPTER X


The appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered, was
tranquillity itself; Mrs.
Bates, deprived of her usual employment,
slumbering on one side of the fire, Frank Churchill, at a table near
her, most deedily occupied about her spectacles, and Jane Fairfax,
standing with her back to them, intent on her pianoforte.
Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet able to shew a most
happy countenance on seeing Emma again.

“This is a pleasure,” said he, in rather a low voice, “coming at least
ten minutes earlier than I had calculated.
You find me trying to be
useful; tell me if you think I shall succeed.”

“What!” said Mrs.
That she was not immediately
ready, Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves; she had
not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it without
emotion; she must reason herself into the power of performance; and
Emma could not but pity such feelings, whatever their origin, and could
not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again.
Mrs.
I dare say, Miss Fairfax, that he either gave his
friend very minute directions, or wrote to Broadwood himself.
Do not
you think so?”

Jane did not look round.
Mrs.
Do
not distress her.”

He shook his head with a smile, and looked as if he had very little
doubt and very little mercy.
Soon afterwards he began again,

“How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on
this occasion, Miss Fairfax.
Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to
be going forward just at this time?—Do you imagine it to be the
consequence of an immediate commission from him, or that he may have
sent only a general direction, an order indefinite as to time, to
depend upon contingencies and conveniences?”

He paused.
I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this
rivet quite firm.
There, it is done.
I have
the pleasure, madam, (to Mrs.
This was all sent with the instrument.
Very thoughtful of
Colonel Campbell, was not it?—He knew Miss Fairfax could have no music
here.
True affection only could have prompted it.”

Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not help being amused;
and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the
remains of a smile, when she saw that with all the deep blush of
consciousness, there had been a smile of secret delight, she had less
scruple in the amusement, and much less compunction with respect to
her.—This amiable, upright, perfect Jane Fairfax was apparently
cherishing very reprehensible feelings.
He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over together.—Emma
took the opportunity of whispering,

“You speak too plain.
I am not in the least
ashamed of my meaning.”

“But really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had never taken up the
idea.”

“I am very glad you did, and that you communicated it to me.
Leave shame to her.
Knightley on horse-back not far off.

“Mr.
Knightley I declare!—I must speak to him if possible, just to
thank him.
I will not open the window here; it would give you all cold;
but I can go into my mother’s room you know.
Quite delightful to have you all meet
so!—Our little room so honoured!”

She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke, and opening the
casement there, immediately called Mr.
We were just in time; my mother just ready
for us.
Pray come in; do come in.
Knightley seemed determined to be heard in
his turn, for most resolutely and commandingly did he say,

“How is your niece, Miss Bates?—I want to inquire after you all, but
particularly your niece.
Tell me how Miss Fairfax is.”

And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear
her in any thing else.
Weston gave
Emma a look of particular meaning.
But Emma still shook her head in
steady scepticism.

“So obliged to you!—so very much obliged to you for the carriage,”
resumed Miss Bates.
Cole has servants to send.
Can I do any thing for _you_?”

“No, I thank you.
But do come in.
Who do you think is here?—Miss
Woodhouse and Miss Smith; so kind as to call to hear the new
pianoforte.
Weston and Mr.
Frank Churchill too!—Quite delightful;
so many friends!”

“No, not now, I thank you.
I must get on
to Kingston as fast as I can.”

“Oh! do come in.
They will be so very happy to see you.”

“No, no; your room is full enough.
Knightley, what a delightful party last
night; how extremely pleasant.—Did you ever see such dancing?—Was not
it delightful?—Miss Woodhouse and Mr.
I think Miss Fairfax dances very well; and Mrs.
Weston is the very best country-dance player, without exception, in
England.
Mr.
Knightley, one moment more; something of consequence—so
shocked!—Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples!”

“What is the matter now?”

“To think of your sending us all your store apples.
You said you had a
great many, and now you have not one left.
We really are so shocked!
Hodges may well be angry.
He never
can bear to be thanked.
Well, (returning to
the room,) I have not been able to succeed.
Mr.
Knightley cannot stop.
He asked me if he could do any thing....”

“Yes,” said Jane, “we heard his kind offers, we heard every thing.”

“Oh! yes, my dear, I dare say you might, because you know, the door was
open, and the window was open, and Mr.
Knightley spoke loud.
Oh!
Instances have been
known of young people passing many, many months successively, without
being at any ball of any description, and no material injury accrue
either to body or mind;—but when a beginning is made—when the
felicities of rapid motion have once been, though slightly, felt—it
must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more.
Woodhouse was persuaded
to spend with his daughter at Randalls, was passed by the two young
people in schemes on the subject.
Frank’s was the first idea; and his
the greatest zeal in pursuing it; for the lady was the best judge of
the difficulties, and the most solicitous for accommodation and
appearance.
But still she had inclination enough for shewing people
again how delightfully Mr.
His first proposition and request, that the dance begun at Mr.
Cole’s
should be finished there—that the same party should be collected, and
the same musician engaged, met with the readiest acquiescence.
Mr.
Weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoyment, and Mrs.
Knightley.
Yes, that will be quite enough for pleasure.
It can be allowable only as the
thought of the moment.”

Somebody said that _Miss_ Gilbert was expected at her brother’s, and
must be invited with the rest.
Somebody else believed _Mrs_.
Gilbert
would have danced the other evening, if she had been asked.
Weston naming one
family of cousins who must be included, and another of very old
acquaintance who could not be left out, it became a certainty that the
five couple would be at least ten, and a very interesting speculation
in what possible manner they could be disposed of.
Weston was in distress
about the supper; and Mr.
Woodhouse opposed it earnestly, on the score
of health.
So would poor little Harriet.
So you would all.
Mrs.
Weston, you would
be quite laid up; do not let them talk of such a wild thing.
Pray do
not let them talk of it.
I do not mean to set you against him, but indeed he is not
quite the thing!”

Mrs.
Weston was sorry for such a charge.
She knew the importance of it,
and said every thing in her power to do it away.
Every door was now
closed, the passage plan given up, and the first scheme of dancing only
in the room they were in resorted to again; and with such good-will on
Frank Churchill’s part, that the space which a quarter of an hour
before had been deemed barely sufficient for five couple, was now
endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten.

“We were too magnificent,” said he. “We allowed unnecessary room.
Ten
couple may stand here very well.”

Emma demurred. “It would be a crowd—a sad crowd; and what could be
worse than dancing without space to turn in?”

“Very true,” he gravely replied; “it was very bad.” But still he went
on measuring, and still he ended with,

“I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple.”

“No, no,” said she, “you are quite unreasonable.
It would be dreadful
to be standing so close!
Nothing can be farther from pleasure than to
be dancing in a crowd—and a crowd in a little room!”

“There is no denying it,” he replied. “I agree with you exactly.
Exquisite, quite exquisite!—Still, however,
having proceeded so far, one is unwilling to give the matter up.
Had she intended ever to _marry_ him, it might have been worth while to
pause and consider, and try to understand the value of his preference,
and the character of his temper; but for all the purposes of their
acquaintance, he was quite amiable enough.
It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement.

“Well, Miss Woodhouse,” he almost immediately began, “your inclination
for dancing has not been quite frightened away, I hope, by the terrors
of my father’s little rooms.
I bring a new proposal on the subject:—a
thought of my father’s, which waits only your approbation to be acted
upon.
May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances
of this little projected ball, to be given, not at Randalls, but at the
Crown Inn?”

“The Crown!”

“Yes; if you and Mr.
Weston sees
no objection to it, provided you are satisfied.
Weston do not.
I think it admirable; and, as far as I can answer for
myself, shall be most happy—It seems the only improvement that could
be.
Papa, do you not think it an excellent improvement?”

She was obliged to repeat and explain it, before it was fully
comprehended; and then, being quite new, farther representations were
necessary to make it acceptable.

“No; he thought it very far from an improvement—a very bad plan—much
worse than the other.
Mr.
Perry is
extremely concerned when any of us are ill.
Churchill, nobody would think of
opening the windows at Randalls.
Nobody could be so imprudent!
I never
heard of such a thing.
I
have often known it done myself.”

“Have you indeed, sir?—Bless me!
I never could have supposed it.
But I
live out of the world, and am often astonished at what I hear.
One
cannot resolve upon them in a hurry.
If Mr. and Mrs.
Weston will be so
obliging as to call here one morning, we may talk it over, and see what
can be done.”

“But, unfortunately, sir, my time is so limited—”

“Oh!” interrupted Emma, “there will be plenty of time for talking every
thing over.
There is no hurry at all.
Not that James ever
complains; but it is right to spare our horses when we can.
Stokes to be
trusted?
Weston’s care.
Weston undertakes to direct the whole.”

“There, papa!—Now you must be satisfied—Our own dear Mrs.
Weston, who
is carefulness itself.
Perry said, so many
years ago, when I had the measles? ‘If _Miss_ _Taylor_ undertakes to
wrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any fears, sir.’ How often have I
heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her!”

“Aye, very true.
Mr.
Perry did say so.
I shall never forget it.
You were very bad with the measles; that is, you would
have been very bad, but for Perry’s great attention.
I hope whenever poor Isabella’s little ones have the
measles, she will send for Perry.”

“My father and Mrs.
I left them there
and came on to Hartfield, impatient for your opinion, and hoping you
might be persuaded to join them and give your advice on the spot.
It would be the greatest pleasure to them,
if you could allow me to attend you there.
It
regarded a supper-room.
This card-room would be wanted
as a card-room now; or, if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by
their four selves, still was it not too small for any comfortable
supper?
Another room of much better size might be secured for the
purpose; but it was at the other end of the house, and a long awkward
passage must be gone through to get at it.
Weston was afraid of draughts for the young people in that passage; and
neither Emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the prospect of being
miserably crowded at supper.
Mrs.
Weston proposed having no regular supper; merely sandwiches, &c.,
set out in the little room; but that was scouted as a wretched
suggestion.
A private dance, without sitting down to supper, was
pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women; and Mrs.
Weston must not speak of it again.
She then took another line of
expediency, and looking into the doubtful room, observed,

“I do not think it _is_ so very small.
Weston at the same time, walking briskly with long steps
through the passage, was calling out,

“You talk a great deal of the length of this passage, my dear.
Weston, “one could know which arrangement our
guests in general would like best.
To do what would be most generally
pleasing must be our object—if one could but tell what that would be.”

“Yes, very true,” cried Frank, “very true.
You want your neighbours’
opinions.
They are not far off.
Shall I call
upon them?
Weston rather hesitating, “if you think
she will be of any use.”

“You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates,” said Emma. “She
will be all delight and gratitude, but she will tell you nothing.
She
will not even listen to your questions.
I see no advantage in
consulting Miss Bates.”

“But she is so amusing, so extremely amusing!
We are growing a little too nice.
No, the young lady, to be sure.
I beg your pardon, sir.
I did not immediately recollect.
Undoubtedly if you wish it, I will endeavour to persuade them both.”
And away he ran.
Long before he reappeared, attending the short, neat, brisk-moving
aunt, and her elegant niece,—Mrs.
Weston, like a sweet-tempered woman
and a good wife, had examined the passage again, and found the evils of
it much less than she had supposed before—indeed very trifling; and
here ended the difficulties of decision.
All the minor arrangements of table and
chair, lights and music, tea and supper, made themselves; or were left
as mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs.
And a delightful dance it was to
be.
As
a counsellor she was not wanted; but as an approver, (a much safer
character,) she was truly welcome.
Her approbation, at once general and
minute, warm and incessant, could not but please; and for another
half-hour they were all walking to and fro, between the different
rooms, some suggesting, some attending, and all in happy enjoyment of
the future.
The party did not break up without Emma’s being positively
secured for the two first dances by the hero of the evening, nor
without her overhearing Mr.
I knew he would!”




CHAPTER XII


One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely
satisfactory to Emma—its being fixed for a day within the granted term
of Frank Churchill’s stay in Surry; for, in spite of Mr.
Weston’s
confidence, she could not think it so very impossible that the
Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his
fortnight.
His
wish of staying longer evidently did not please; but it was not
opposed.
All was safe and prosperous; and as the removal of one
solicitude generally makes way for another, Emma, being now certain of
her ball, began to adopt as the next vexation Mr.
Knightley’s provoking
indifference about it.
Either because he did not dance himself, or
because the plan had been formed without his being consulted, he seemed
resolved that it should not interest him, determined against its
exciting any present curiosity, or affording him any future amusement.
To her voluntary communications Emma could get no more approving reply,
than,

“Very well.
If the Westons think it worth while to be at all this
trouble for a few hours of noisy entertainment, I have nothing to say
against it, but that they shall not chuse pleasures for me.—Oh! yes, I
must be there; I could not refuse; and I will keep as much awake as I
can; but I would rather be at home, looking over William Larkins’s
week’s account; much rather, I confess.—Pleasure in seeing dancing!—not
I, indeed—I never look at it—I do not know who does.—Fine dancing, I
believe, like virtue, must be its own reward.
Those who are standing by
are usually thinking of something very different.”

This Emma felt was aimed at her; and it made her quite angry.
It made her animated—open hearted—she voluntarily said;—

“Oh!
What a disappointment it would be!
Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise.
Alas! there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr.
Two
days of joyful security were immediately followed by the over-throw of
every thing.
A letter arrived from Mr.
Mrs.
As to his going, it was inevitable.
He must be gone
within a few hours, though without feeling any real alarm for his aunt,
to lessen his repugnance.
Mrs.
When once it had
been read, there was no doing any thing, but lament and exclaim.
Her father’s feelings were quite distinct.
Churchill’s illness, and wanted to know how she was treated; and
as for the ball, it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed; but
they would all be safer at home.
He felt the going
away almost too much to speak of it.
Miss Woodhouse,
why are you always so right?”

“Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance.
My father depends
on it.
Happy those, who can remain at
Highbury!”

“As you do us such ample justice now,” said Emma, laughing, “I will
venture to ask, whether you did not come a little doubtfully at first?
Do not we rather surpass your expectations?
You would not have been so long in
coming, if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury.”

He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the sentiment, Emma
was convinced that it had been so.

“And you must be off this very morning?”

“Yes; my father is to join me here: we shall walk back together, and I
must be off immediately.
How unlucky!
It
was a right thing to do.
She was out; and I felt it impossible not
to wait till she came in.
It was better to pay
my visit, then”—

He hesitated, got up, walked to a window.

“In short,” said he, “perhaps, Miss Woodhouse—I think you can hardly be
quite without suspicion”—

He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts.
She believed he was looking at her; probably reflecting
on what she had said, and trying to understand the manner.
It was natural for him to feel that he had _cause_ to sigh.
My regard for Hartfield is most warm”—

He stopt again, rose again, and seemed quite embarrassed.—He was more
in love with her than Emma had supposed; and who can say how it might
have ended, if his father had not made his appearance?
A very few minutes more, however, completed the present trial.
Weston, always alert when business was to be done, and as incapable of
procrastinating any evil that was inevitable, as of foreseeing any that
was doubtful, said, “It was time to go;” and the young man, though he
might and did sigh, could not but agree, to take leave.

“I shall hear about you all,” said he; “that is my chief consolation.
I
shall hear of every thing that is going on among you.
She has been so kind as to promise
it.
In her letters
I shall be at dear Highbury again.”

A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest “Good-bye,” closed
the speech, and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill.
They had been meeting almost every day since his
arrival.
It had been a very happy
fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common
course of Hartfield days.
He may spend the
evening with his dear William Larkins now if he likes.”

Mr.
Knightley, however, shewed no triumphant happiness.
She had been particularly unwell, however, suffering from
headache to a degree, which made her aunt declare, that had the ball
taken place, she did not think Jane could have attended it; and it was
charity to impute some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor of
ill-health.
At first, she thought it was a good
deal; and afterwards, but little.
She had great pleasure in hearing
Frank Churchill talked of; and, for his sake, greater pleasure than
ever in seeing Mr. and Mrs.
Weston; she was very often thinking of him,
and quite impatient for a letter, that she might know how he was, how
were his spirits, how was his aunt, and what was the chance of his
coming to Randalls again this spring.
But, on the other hand, she could
not admit herself to be unhappy, nor, after the first morning, to be
less disposed for employment than usual; she was still busy and
cheerful; and, pleasing as he was, she could yet imagine him to have
faults; and farther, though thinking of him so much, and, as she sat
drawing or working, forming a thousand amusing schemes for the progress
and close of their attachment, fancying interesting dialogues, and
inventing elegant letters; the conclusion of every imaginary
declaration on his side was that she _refused_ _him_.
When she became
sensible of this, it struck her that she could not be very much in
love; for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to
quit her father, never to marry, a strong attachment certainly must
produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings.

“I do not find myself making any use of the word _sacrifice_,” said
she.—“In not one of all my clever replies, my delicate negatives, is
there any allusion to making a sacrifice.
I do suspect that he is not
really necessary to my happiness.
So much the better.
I certainly will
not persuade myself to feel more than I do.
I am quite enough in love.
No, if he had believed
me at all to share his feelings, he would not have been so wretched.
Could he have thought himself encouraged, his looks and language at
parting would have been different.—Still, however, I must be on my
guard.
This is in the supposition of his attachment continuing what it
now is; but I do not know that I expect it will; I do not look upon him
to be quite the sort of man—I do not altogether build upon his
steadiness or constancy.—His feelings are warm, but I can imagine them
rather changeable.—Every consideration of the subject, in short, makes
me thankful that my happiness is not more deeply involved.—I shall do
very well again after a little while—and then, it will be a good thing
over; for they say every body is in love once in their lives, and I
shall have been let off easily.”

When his letter to Mrs.
Weston arrived, Emma had the perusal of it; and
she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made her at
first shake her head over her own sensations, and think she had
undervalued their strength.
It was a long, well-written letter, giving
the particulars of his journey and of his feelings, expressing all the
affection, gratitude, and respect which was natural and honourable, and
describing every thing exterior and local that could be supposed
attractive, with spirit and precision.
Weston, that it had not added any lasting warmth, that she
could still do without the writer, and that he must learn to do without
her.
Her resolution of refusal only grew
more interesting by the addition of a scheme for his subsequent
consolation and happiness.
His recollection of Harriet, and the words
which clothed it, the “beautiful little friend,” suggested to her the
idea of Harriet’s succeeding her in his affections.
I know
the danger of indulging such speculations.
As Frank Churchill’s arrival had succeeded Mr.
Elton’s concerns were assuming the most
irresistible form.—His wedding-day was named.
He would soon be among
them again; Mr.
There was hardly time to talk over
the first letter from Enscombe before “Mr.
Elton and his bride” was in
every body’s mouth, and Frank Churchill was forgotten.
Emma grew sick
at the sound.
She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr.
Elton; and Harriet’s mind, she had been willing to hope, had been
lately gaining strength.
With Mr.
Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all the
reasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that Emma could
give.
Harriet
listened submissively, and said “it was very true—it was just as Miss
Woodhouse described—it was not worth while to think about them—and she
would not think about them any longer” but no change of subject could
avail, and the next half-hour saw her as anxious and restless about the
Eltons as before.
Elton’s marrying, Harriet, is the strongest reproach you can make _me_.
It
was all my doing, I know.
Elton for my sake; because for your own sake rather, I
would wish it to be done, for the sake of what is more important than
my comfort, a habit of self-command in you, a consideration of what is
your duty, an attention to propriety, an endeavour to avoid the
suspicions of others, to save your health and credit, and restore your
tranquillity.
They are very important—and sorry I am that you cannot feel them
sufficiently to act upon them.
My being saved from pain is a very
secondary consideration.
Perhaps I may sometimes have felt that Harriet would not forget what
was due—or rather what would be kind by me.”

This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest.
Dear Harriet!—I would not change
you for the clearest-headed, longest-sighted, best-judging female
breathing.
I
mention no names; but happy the man who changes Emma for Harriet!”




CHAPTER XIV


Mrs.
Elton was first seen at church: but though devotion might be
interrupted, curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pew, and
it must be left for the visits in form which were then to be paid, to
settle whether she were very pretty indeed, or only rather pretty, or
not pretty at all.
Emma had feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or propriety, to
make her resolve on not being the last to pay her respects; and she
made a point of Harriet’s going with her, that the worst of the
business might be gone through as soon as possible.
She could not enter the house again, could not be in the same room to
which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago, to
lace up her boot, without _recollecting_.
A thousand vexatious thoughts
would recur.
Compliments, charades, and horrible blunders; and it was
not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too;
but she behaved very well, and was only rather pale and silent.
The
visit was of course short; and there was so much embarrassment and
occupation of mind to shorten it, that Emma would not allow herself
entirely to form an opinion of the lady, and on no account to give one,
beyond the nothing-meaning terms of being “elegantly dressed, and very
pleasing.”

She did not really like her.
Her person was rather good; her face not unpretty;
but neither feature, nor air, nor voice, nor manner, were elegant.
Emma
thought at least it would turn out so.
Elton, his manners did not appear—but no, she would not
permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners.
It was
an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits, and a
man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it.
The woman
was better off; she might have the assistance of fine clothes, and the
privilege of bashfulness, but the man had only his own good sense to
depend on; and when she considered how peculiarly unlucky poor Mr.
Elton was in being in the same room at once with the woman he had just
married, the woman he had wanted to marry, and the woman whom he had
been expected to marry, she must allow him to have the right to look as
little wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as little really easy as
could be.

“Well, Miss Woodhouse,” said Harriet, when they had quitted the house,
and after waiting in vain for her friend to begin; “Well, Miss
Woodhouse, (with a gentle sigh,) what do you think of her?—Is not she
very charming?”

There was a little hesitation in Emma’s answer.

“Oh! yes—very—a very pleasing young woman.”

“I think her beautiful, quite beautiful.”

“Very nicely dressed, indeed; a remarkably elegant gown.”

“I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love.”

“Oh! no—there is nothing to surprize one at all.—A pretty fortune; and
she came in his way.”

“I dare say,” returned Harriet, sighing again, “I dare say she was very
much attached to him.”

“Perhaps she might; but it is not every man’s fate to marry the woman
who loves him best.
Well, I wish them happy with all my heart.
And now, Miss
Woodhouse, I do not think I shall mind seeing them again.
To know that he has not
thrown himself away, is such a comfort!—She does seem a charming young
woman, just what he deserves.
He called her ‘Augusta.’
How delightful!”

When the visit was returned, Emma made up her mind.
Elton, she had a quarter
of an hour of the lady’s conversation to herself, and could composedly
attend to her; and the quarter of an hour quite convinced her that Mrs.
Elton was a vain woman, extremely well satisfied with herself, and
thinking much of her own importance; that she meant to shine and be
very superior, but with manners which had been formed in a bad school,
pert and familiar; that all her notions were drawn from one set of
people, and one style of living; that if not foolish she was ignorant,
and that her society would certainly do Mr.
Harriet would have been a better match.
Elton seemed most favourably impressed by
the size of the room, the entrance, and all that she could see or
imagine. “Very like Maple Grove indeed!—She was quite struck by the
likeness!—That room was the very shape and size of the morning-room at
Maple Grove; her sister’s favourite room.”—Mr.
Elton was appealed
to.—“Was not it astonishingly like?—She could really almost fancy
herself at Maple Grove.”

“And the staircase—You know, as I came in, I observed how very like the
staircase was; placed exactly in the same part of the house.
I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, it is very
delightful to me, to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial
to as Maple Grove.
A charming place, undoubtedly.
Every body
who sees it is struck by its beauty; but to me, it has been quite a
home.
Whenever you are transplanted, like me, Miss Woodhouse, you will
understand how very delightful it is to meet with any thing at all like
what one has left behind.
I always say this is quite one of the evils
of matrimony.”

Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it was fully sufficient
for Mrs.
Elton, who only wanted to be talking herself.

“So extremely like Maple Grove!
And it is not merely the house—the
grounds, I assure you, as far as I could observe, are strikingly like.
The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here, and stand
very much in the same way—just across the lawn; and I had a glimpse of
a fine large tree, with a bench round it, which put me so exactly in
mind!
People
who have extensive grounds themselves are always pleased with any thing
in the same style.”

Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment.
She had a great idea that
people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the
extensive grounds of any body else; but it was not worth while to
attack an error so double-dyed, and therefore only said in reply,

“When you have seen more of this country, I am afraid you will think
you have overrated Hartfield.
It is the garden of England, you
know.
Surry is the garden of England.”

“Yes; but we must not rest our claims on that distinction.
Elton, with a most satisfied smile. “I
never heard any county but Surry called so.”

Emma was silenced.

“My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring, or
summer at farthest,” continued Mrs.
They would hardly come in their chaise, I think, at that season
of the year.
Indeed, when the time draws on, I shall decidedly
recommend their bringing the barouche-landau; it will be so very much
preferable.
When people come into a beautiful country of this sort, you
know, Miss Woodhouse, one naturally wishes them to see as much as
possible; and Mr.
We explored
to King’s-Weston twice last summer, in that way, most delightfully,
just after their first having the barouche-landau.
We are rather out of distance of the very
striking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak of; and
we are a very quiet set of people, I believe; more disposed to stay at
home than engage in schemes of pleasure.”

“Ah! there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort.
Many a time has Selina said, when she has been going to
Bristol, ‘I really cannot get this girl to move from the house.
I
absolutely must go in by myself, though I hate being stuck up in the
barouche-landau without a companion; but Augusta, I believe, with her
own good-will, would never stir beyond the park paling.’ Many a time
has she said so; and yet I am no advocate for entire seclusion.
Woodhouse), Your father’s state of
health must be a great drawback.
Woodhouse good.”

“My father tried it more than once, formerly; but without receiving any
benefit; and Mr.
In my Bath
life, I have seen such instances of it!
It would be a charming introduction for you, who have lived
so secluded a life; and I could immediately secure you some of the best
society in the place.
A line from me would bring you a little host of
acquaintance; and my particular friend, Mrs.
Partridge, the lady I have
always resided with when in Bath, would be most happy to shew you any
attentions, and would be the very person for you to go into public
with.”

It was as much as Emma could bear, without being impolite.
Elton for what was called an
_introduction_—of her going into public under the auspices of a friend
of Mrs.
Elton’s—probably some vulgar, dashing widow, who, with the help
of a boarder, just made a shift to live!—The dignity of Miss Woodhouse,
of Hartfield, was sunk indeed!
She restrained herself, however, from any of the reproofs she could
have given, and only thanked Mrs.
Upon these
occasions, a lady’s character generally precedes her; and Highbury has
long known that you are a superior performer.”

“Oh! no, indeed; I must protest against any such idea.
It is a necessary of life
to me; and having always been used to a very musical society, both at
Maple Grove and in Bath, it would have been a most serious sacrifice.
E. when he was speaking of my future home,
and expressing his fears lest the retirement of it should be
disagreeable; and the inferiority of the house too—knowing what I had
been accustomed to—of course he was not wholly without apprehension.
To those who
had no resources it was a different thing; but my resources made me
quite independent.
I hoped I was perfectly equal
to any sacrifice of that description.
Certainly I had been accustomed
to every luxury at Maple Grove; but I did assure him that two carriages
were not necessary to my happiness, nor were spacious apartments.
‘But,’ said I, ‘to be quite honest, I do not think I can live without
something of a musical society.
I condition for nothing else; but
without music, life would be a blank to me.’”

“We cannot suppose,” said Emma, smiling, “that Mr.
I hope we shall have many sweet little
concerts together.
If _we_ exert ourselves, I think we shall
not be long in want of allies.
Selina has entirely given up music—never
touches the instrument—though she played sweetly.
Bird and Mrs.
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright.
I used to
be quite angry with Selina; but really I begin now to comprehend that a
married woman has many things to call her attention.
I believe I was
half an hour this morning shut up with my housekeeper.”

“But every thing of that kind,” said Emma, “will soon be in so regular
a train—”

“Well,” said Mrs.
Elton, laughing, “we shall see.”

Emma, finding her so determined upon neglecting her music, had nothing
more to say; and, after a moment’s pause, Mrs.
Elton chose another
subject.

“We have been calling at Randalls,” said she, “and found them both at
home; and very pleasant people they seem to be.
I like them extremely.
Mr.
And _she_ appears so truly good—there is
something so motherly and kind-hearted about her, that it wins upon one
directly.
She was your governess, I think?”

Emma was almost too much astonished to answer; but Mrs.
Elton hardly
waited for the affirmative before she went on.

“Having understood as much, I was rather astonished to find her so very
lady-like!
Their propriety, simplicity, and elegance, would make them the safest
model for any young woman.”

“And who do you think came in while we were there?”

Emma was quite at a loss.
Elton; “Knightley himself!—Was not it
lucky?—for, not being within when he called the other day, I had never
seen him before; and of course, as so particular a friend of Mr.
Knightley is quite the gentleman.
I like him very much.
Absolutely insufferable!
A little upstart,
vulgar being, with her Mr.
Knightley is a gentleman!
I could
not have believed it!
And to propose that she and I should unite to
form a musical club!
Weston!—Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be a
gentlewoman!
Worse and worse.
I never met with her equal.
How angry and how diverted he
would be!
A little
quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear.
But I believe I
am nice; I do not like strange voices; and nobody speaks like you and
poor Miss Taylor.
However, she seems a very obliging, pretty-behaved
young lady, and no doubt will make him a very good wife.
Ah! it
shews what a sad invalid I am!
But I do not like the corner into
Vicarage Lane.”

“I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir.
Mr.
It was being very deficient.”

“But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony; and therefore why
should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_?
It is encouraging people to marry if you
make so much of them.”

“No, my dear, I never encouraged any body to marry, but I would always
wish to pay every proper attention to a lady—and a bride, especially,
is never to be neglected.
A bride, you
know, my dear, is always the first in company, let the others be who
they may.”

“Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry, I do not know what
is.
This is a matter of mere common
politeness and good-breeding, and has nothing to do with any
encouragement to people to marry.”

Emma had done.
Her father was growing nervous, and could not understand
_her_.
CHAPTER XV


Emma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill
opinion of Mrs.
Such as
Mrs.
Elton appeared to her on this second interview, such she appeared
whenever they met again,—self-important, presuming, familiar, ignorant,
and ill-bred.
There was no reason to suppose Mr.
Elton thought at all differently
from his wife.
He seemed not merely happy with her, but proud.
Her manners, too—and Mr.
Elton’s, were unpleasant towards Harriet.
She was, of course, the
object of their joint dislike.—When they had nothing else to say, it
must be always easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse; and the enmity
which they dared not shew in open disrespect to her, found a broader
vent in contemptuous treatment of Harriet.
Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax; and from the first.
Not
merely when a state of warfare with one young lady might be supposed to
recommend the other, but from the very first; and she was not satisfied
with expressing a natural and reasonable admiration—but without
solicitation, or plea, or privilege, she must be wanting to assist and
befriend her.—Before Emma had forfeited her confidence, and about the
third time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs.
I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that point.
Campbell, I
have no idea that you will suppose her talents can be unknown.”

“Oh! but dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in such retirement, such
obscurity, so thrown away.—Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed
with the Campbells are so palpably at an end!
And I think she feels it.
I am sure she does.
She is very timid and silent.
I like her the better for it.
I must
confess it is a recommendation to me.
I assure
you, Jane Fairfax is a very delightful character, and interests me more
than I can express.”

“You appear to feel a great deal—but I am not aware how you or any of
Miss Fairfax’s acquaintance here, any of those who have known her
longer than yourself, can shew her any other attention than”—

“My dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be done by those who dare to
act.
My acquaintance is so very
extensive, that I have little doubt of hearing of something to suit her
shortly.—I shall introduce her, of course, very particularly to my
brother and sister when they come to us.
You may
have done wrong with regard to Mr.
Let me not suppose
that she dares go about, Emma Woodhouse-ing me!—But upon my honour,
there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman’s tongue!”

Emma had not to listen to such paradings again—to any so exclusively
addressed to herself—so disgustingly decorated with a “dear Miss
Woodhouse.” The change on Mrs.
Elton’s guidance, the very active
patroness of Jane Fairfax, and only sharing with others in a general
way, in knowing what was felt, what was meditated, what was done.
She looked on with some amusement.—Miss Bates’s gratitude for Mrs.
Elton’s attentions to Jane was in the first style of guileless
simplicity and warmth.
She was quite one of her worthies—the most
amiable, affable, delightful woman—just as accomplished and
condescending as Mrs.
Elton meant to be considered.
Emma’s only
surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and
tolerate Mrs.
She heard of her walking with
the Eltons, sitting with the Eltons, spending a day with the Eltons!
And now to chuse the
mortification of Mrs.
According to Miss
Bates—it all came from her—Mrs.
Would Jane but go, means were to be found, servants sent, friends
contrived—no travelling difficulty allowed to exist; but still she had
declined it!

“She must have some motive, more powerful than appears, for refusing
this invitation,” was Emma’s conclusion. “She must be under some sort
of penance, inflicted either by the Campbells or herself.
Weston ventured this
apology for Jane.

“We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage, my
dear Emma—but it is better than being always at home.
Weston,” said Mr.
Could she have chosen with whom to associate, she would not have chosen
her.
But (with a reproachful smile at Emma) she receives attentions
from Mrs.
Weston was giving her a momentary glance; and she
was herself struck by his warmth.
Elton’s, I should have imagined, would rather
disgust than gratify Miss Fairfax.
Mrs.
Elton’s invitations I should
have imagined any thing but inviting.”

“I should not wonder,” said Mrs.
And besides the operation of this, as a general principle, you may be
sure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs.
Elton by her superiority both of mind
and manner; and that, face to face, Mrs.
Elton treats her with all the
respect which she has a claim to.
Elton’s way before—and no degree of vanity can
prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action, if
not in consciousness.”

“I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax,” said Emma.
Little Henry
was in her thoughts, and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made her
irresolute what else to say.

“Yes,” he replied, “any body may know how highly I think of her.”

“And yet,” said Emma, beginning hastily and with an arch look, but soon
stopping—it was better, however, to know the worst at once—she hurried
on—“And yet, perhaps, you may hardly be aware yourself how highly it
is.
The extent of your admiration may take you by surprize some day or
other.”

Mr.
Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick
leather gaiters, and either the exertion of getting them together, or
some other cause, brought the colour into his face, as he answered,

“Oh! are you there?—But you are miserably behindhand.
Mr.
Cole gave me
a hint of it six weeks ago.”

He stopped.—Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs.
Weston, and did not
herself know what to think.
In a moment he went on—

“That will never be, however, I can assure you.
Miss Fairfax, I dare
say, would not have me if I were to ask her—and I am very sure I shall
never ask her.”

Emma returned her friend’s pressure with interest; and was pleased
enough to exclaim,

“You are not vain, Mr.
Knightley.
You have scolded me too much for match-making,
for me to presume to take such a liberty with you.
What I said just
now, meant nothing.
She has a fault.
She has
not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife.”

Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault. “Well,” said
she, “and you soon silenced Mr.
Cole does not want to be wiser or
wittier than his neighbours.”

“In that respect how unlike dear Mrs.
Elton, who wants to be wiser and
wittier than all the world!
I wonder how she speaks of the Coles—what
she calls them!
Cole?
I have no faith in Mrs.
Elton’s
acknowledging herself the inferior in thought, word, or deed; or in her
being under any restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good-breeding.
I cannot imagine that she will not be continually insulting her visitor
with praise, encouragement, and offers of service; that she will not be
continually detailing her magnificent intentions, from the procuring
her a permanent situation to the including her in those delightful
exploring parties which are to take place in the barouche-landau.”

“Jane Fairfax has feeling,” said Mr.
Knightley—“I do not accuse her of
want of feeling.
Her sensibilities, I suspect, are strong—and her
temper excellent in its power of forbearance, patience, self-control;
but it wants openness.
No—till Cole alluded to my
supposed attachment, it had never entered my head.
Weston,” said Emma triumphantly when he left them, “what do
you say now to Mr.
Knightley’s marrying Jane Fairfax?”

“Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much occupied by the
idea of _not_ being in love with her, that I should not wonder if it
were to end in his being so at last.
Dinner-parties and
evening-parties were made for him and his lady; and invitations flowed
in so fast that she had soon the pleasure of apprehending they were
never to have a disengaged day.

“I see how it is,” said she. “I see what a life I am to lead among you.
We really seem quite
the fashion.
Her Bath habits made evening-parties
perfectly natural to her, and Maple Grove had given her a taste for
dinners.
She was a little shocked at the want of two drawing rooms, at
the poor attempt at rout-cakes, and there being no ice in the Highbury
card-parties.
Mrs.
Bates, Mrs.
Goddard and others, were a
good deal behind-hand in knowledge of the world, but she would soon
shew them how every thing ought to be arranged.
They must not do less than others, or she
should be exposed to odious suspicions, and imagined capable of pitiful
resentment.
After Emma had talked about it for
ten minutes, Mr.
Woodhouse felt no unwillingness, and only made the
usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom of the table himself,
with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should do it for him.
The persons to be invited, required little thought.
Besides the Eltons,
it must be the Westons and Mr.
Knightley; so far it was all of
course—and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must
be asked to make the eighth:—but this invitation was not given with
equal satisfaction, and on many accounts Emma was particularly pleased
by Harriet’s begging to be allowed to decline it. “She would rather not
be in his company more than she could help.
If Miss Woodhouse would not be displeased, she would
rather stay at home.” It was precisely what Emma would have wished, had
she deemed it possible enough for wishing.
She was delighted with the
fortitude of her little friend—for fortitude she knew it was in her to
give up being in company and stay at home; and she could now invite the
very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth, Jane Fairfax.—
Since her last conversation with Mrs.
He had said that Jane
Fairfax received attentions from Mrs.
Elton which nobody else paid her.

“This is very true,” said she, “at least as far as relates to me, which
was all that was meant—and it is very shameful.—Of the same age—and
always knowing her—I ought to have been more her friend.—She will never
like me now.
I have neglected her too long.
The two eldest little
Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some
weeks in the spring, and their papa now proposed bringing them, and
staying one whole day at Hartfield—which one day would be the very day
of this party.—His professional engagements did not allow of his being
put off, but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening
so.
Mr.
Woodhouse considered eight persons at dinner together as the
utmost that his nerves could bear—and here would be a ninth—and Emma
apprehended that it would be a ninth very much out of humour at not
being able to come even to Hartfield for forty-eight hours without
falling in with a dinner-party.
She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself, by
representing that though he certainly would make them nine, yet he
always said so little, that the increase of noise would be very
immaterial.
She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself, to
have him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposed to her
instead of his brother.
Woodhouse than to Emma.
He might be able to join them in the
evening, but certainly not to dinner.
Mr.
Woodhouse was quite at ease;
and the seeing him so, with the arrival of the little boys and the
philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate, removed the
chief of even Emma’s vexation.
The day came, the party were punctually assembled, and Mr.
John
Knightley seemed early to devote himself to the business of being
agreeable.
Elton, as
elegant as lace and pearls could make her, he looked at in
silence—wanting only to observe enough for Isabella’s information—but
Miss Fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could
talk to her.
He had met her before breakfast as he was returning from a
walk with his little boys, when it had been just beginning to rain.
It is my daily errand.
I always fetch the letters
when I am here.
When you
have lived to my age, you will begin to think letters are never worth
going through the rain for.”

There was a little blush, and then this answer,

“I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in the midst of every
dearest connexion, and therefore I cannot expect that simply growing
older should make me indifferent about letters.”

“Indifferent!
Oh! no—I never conceived you could become indifferent.
I know Mr.
John Knightley too well—I am
very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body.
I
can easily believe that letters are very little to you, much less than
to me, but it is not your being ten years older than myself which makes
the difference, it is not age, but situation.
You have every body
dearest to you always at hand, I, probably, never shall again; and
therefore till I have outlived all my affections, a post-office, I
think, must always have power to draw me out, in worse weather than
to-day.”

“When I talked of your being altered by time, by the progress of
years,” said John Knightley, “I meant to imply the change of situation
which time usually brings.
As an
old friend, you will allow me to hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten years
hence you may have as many concentrated objects as I have.”

It was kindly said, and very far from giving offence.
A pleasant “thank
you” seemed meant to laugh it off, but a blush, a quivering lip, a tear
in the eye, shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh.
My dear, did you change your stockings?”

“Yes, sir, I did indeed; and I am very much obliged by your kind
solicitude about me.”

“My dear Miss Fairfax, young ladies are very sure to be cared for.—I
hope your good grand-mama and aunt are well.
I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour.
My daughter and I are
both highly sensible of your goodness, and have the greatest
satisfaction in seeing you at Hartfield.”

The kind-hearted, polite old man might then sit down and feel that he
had done his duty, and made every fair lady welcome and easy.
Elton, and her
remonstrances now opened upon Jane.

“My dear Jane, what is this I hear?—Going to the post-office in the
rain!—This must not be, I assure you.—You sad girl, how could you do
such a thing?—It is a sign I was not there to take care of you.”

Jane very patiently assured her that she had not caught any cold.

“Oh! do not tell _me_.
Mrs.
Weston kindly and persuasively, “I certainly do
feel tempted to give.
Yes, I am sure you are
much too reasonable.
You look as if you would not do such a thing
again.”

“Oh! she _shall_ _not_ do such a thing again,” eagerly rejoined Mrs.
E.
Weston,
you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves.
But I do flatter
myself, my dear Jane, that my influence is not entirely worn out.
John Knightley.

“The post-office is a wonderful establishment!” said she.—“The
regularity and despatch of it!
If one thinks of all that it has to do,
and all that it does so well, it is really astonishing!”

“It is certainly very well regulated.”

“So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears!
So seldom that a
letter, among the thousands that are constantly passing about the
kingdom, is even carried wrong—and not one in a million, I suppose,
actually lost!
If you want any farther
explanation,” continued he, smiling, “they are paid for it.
The public pays and must be served
well.”

The varieties of handwriting were farther talked of, and the usual
observations made.

“I have heard it asserted,” said John Knightley, “that the same sort of
handwriting often prevails in a family; and where the same master
teaches, it is natural enough.
I
have not always known their writing apart.”

“Yes,” said his brother hesitatingly, “there is a likeness.
I know what
you mean—but Emma’s hand is the strongest.”

“Isabella and Emma both write beautifully,” said Mr.
Woodhouse; “and
always did.
And so does poor Mrs.
Weston; but stopped, on perceiving that Mrs.
Is it necessary for me to use any roundabout
phrase?—Your Yorkshire friend—your correspondent in Yorkshire;—that
would be the way, I suppose, if I were very bad.—No, I can pronounce
his name without the smallest distress.
I certainly get better and
better.—Now for it.”

Mrs.
Frank Churchill
writes one of the best gentleman’s hands I ever saw.”

“I do not admire it,” said Mr.
It is like a woman’s writing.”

This was not submitted to by either lady.
They vindicated him against
the base aspersion. “No, it by no means wanted strength—it was not a
large hand, but very clear and certainly strong.
Weston
any letter about her to produce?” No, she had heard from him very
lately, but having answered the letter, had put it away.

“If we were in the other room,” said Emma, “if I had my writing-desk, I
am sure I could produce a specimen.
I have a note of his.—Do not you
remember, Mrs.
Weston, employing him to write for you one day?”

“He chose to say he was employed”—

“Well, well, I have that note; and can shew it after dinner to convince
Mr.
Knightley.”

“Oh! when a gallant young man, like Mr.
Frank Churchill,” said Mr.
Knightley dryly, “writes to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse, he will,
of course, put forth his best.”

Dinner was on table.—Mrs.
Woodhouse had reached her with his request to be
allowed to hand her into the dining-parlour, was saying—

“Must I go first?
She had heard and seen it all; and felt some curiosity to know whether
the wet walk of this morning had produced any.
She was quite determined not to utter a word that should
hurt Jane Fairfax’s feelings; and they followed the other ladies out of
the room, arm in arm, with an appearance of good-will highly becoming
to the beauty and grace of each.
She and Mrs.
Mrs.
If Jane repressed her for a little time, she soon
began again; and though much that passed between them was in a
half-whisper, especially on Mrs.
Elton, who can
have thought of it as I have done?”

“But you have not seen so much of the world as I have.
You do not know
how many candidates there always are for the _first_ situations.
I saw
a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove.
A cousin of
Mr.
Suckling, Mrs.
Bragge, had such an infinity of applications; every
body was anxious to be in her family, for she moves in the first
circle.
You may imagine how desirable!
Of all houses in the kingdom Mrs.
Bragge’s is the one I would most wish
to see you in.”

“Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer,” said
Jane. “I must spend some time with them; I am sure they will want
it;—afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself.
But I would
not wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present.”

“Trouble! aye, I know your scruples.
Partridge in
a day or two, and shall give her a strict charge to be on the look-out
for any thing eligible.”

“Thank you, but I would rather you did not mention the subject to her;
till the time draws nearer, I do not wish to be giving any body
trouble.”

“But, my dear child, the time is drawing near; here is April, and June,
or say even July, is very near, with such business to accomplish before
us.
Your inexperience really amuses me!
A situation such as you
deserve, and your friends would require for you, is no everyday
occurrence, is not obtained at a moment’s notice; indeed, indeed, we
must begin inquiring directly.”

“Excuse me, ma’am, but this is by no means my intention; I make no
inquiry myself, and should be sorry to have any made by my friends.
There are places in town, offices, where inquiry
would soon produce something—Offices for the sale—not quite of human
flesh—but of human intellect.”

“Oh! my dear, human flesh!
Suckling was always rather a friend
to the abolition.”

“I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade,” replied Jane;
“governess-trade, I assure you, was all that I had in view; widely
different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on; but as to
the greater misery of the victims, I do not know where it lies.
Elton. “Aye, _that_ may suit
your humble ideas of yourself;—I know what a modest creature you are;
but it will not satisfy your friends to have you taking up with any
thing that may offer, any inferior, commonplace situation, in a family
not moving in a certain circle, or able to command the elegancies of
life.”

“You are very obliging; but as to all that, I am very indifferent; it
would be no object to me to be with the rich; my mortifications, I
think, would only be the greater; I should suffer more from comparison.
A gentleman’s family is all that I should condition for.”

“I know you, I know you; you would take up with any thing; but I shall
be a little more nice, and I am sure the good Campbells will be quite
on my side; with your superior talents, you have a right to move in the
first circle.
Your musical knowledge alone would entitle you to name
your own terms, have as many rooms as you like, and mix in the family
as much as you chose;—that is—I do not know—if you knew the harp, you
might do all that, I am very sure; but you sing as well as play;—yes, I
really believe you might, even without the harp, stipulate for what you
chose;—and you must and shall be delightfully, honourably and
comfortably settled before the Campbells or I have any rest.”

“You may well class the delight, the honour, and the comfort of such a
situation together,” said Jane, “they are pretty sure to be equal;
however, I am very serious in not wishing any thing to be attempted at
present for me.
I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mrs.
Elton, I am
obliged to any body who feels for me, but I am quite serious in wishing
nothing to be done till the summer.
For two or three months longer I
shall remain where I am, and as I am.”

“And I am quite serious too, I assure you,” replied Mrs.
Elton gaily,
“in resolving to be always on the watch, and employing my friends to
watch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us.”

In this style she ran on; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till
Mr.
I admire all that quaint,
old-fashioned politeness; it is much more to my taste than modern ease;
modern ease often disgusts me.
But this good old Mr.
Woodhouse, I wish
you had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner.
Oh!
I assure you I
began to think my cara sposo would be absolutely jealous.
A bride, you know, must appear like
a bride, but my natural taste is all for simplicity; a simple style of
dress is so infinitely preferable to finery.
But I am quite in the
minority, I believe; few people seem to value simplicity of dress,—show
and finery are every thing.
He had been too
much expected by the best judges, for surprize—but there was great joy.
Mr.
Woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now, as he would have been
sorry to see him before.
John Knightley only was in mute
astonishment.—That a man who might have spent his evening quietly at
home after a day of business in London, should set off again, and walk
half a mile to another man’s house, for the sake of being in mixed
company till bed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of civility
and the noise of numbers, was a circumstance to strike him deeply.
John Knightley looked
at him with amazement, then shrugged his shoulders, and said, “I could
not have believed it even of _him_.”

Mr.
Weston, he
had not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body in
the room.
He gave her a letter, it was from Frank, and to herself; he
had met with it in his way, and had taken the liberty of opening it.

“Read it, read it,” said he, “it will give you pleasure; only a few
lines—will not take you long; read it to Emma.”

The two ladies looked over it together; and he sat smiling and talking
to them the whole time, in a voice a little subdued, but very audible
to every body.

“Well, he is coming, you see; good news, I think.
Well, what do you say
to it?—I always told you he would be here again soon, did not I?—Anne,
my dear, did not I always tell you so, and you would not believe me?—In
town next week, you see—at the latest, I dare say; for _she_ is as
impatient as the black gentleman when any thing is to be done; most
likely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday.
But it is an excellent thing to have Frank among us
again, so near as town.
They will stay a good while when they do come,
and he will be half his time with us.
This is precisely what I wanted.
Well, pretty good news, is not it?
Have you finished it?
Has Emma read
it all?
Put it up, put it up; we will have a good talk about it some
other time, but it will not do now.
I shall only just mention the
circumstance to the others in a common way.”

Mrs.
Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion.
Her looks and
words had nothing to restrain them.
She was happy, she knew she was
happy, and knew she ought to be happy.
Mr.
Woodhouse or Mr.
Knightley particularly
delighted.
Weston and Emma, to
be made happy;—from them he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax, but
she was so deep in conversation with John Knightley, that it would have
been too positive an interruption; and finding himself close to Mrs.
CHAPTER XVIII


“I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to you,”
said Mr.
Mrs.
Elton, very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended
her by such a hope, smiled most graciously.

“You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill, I presume,” he
continued—“and know him to be my son, though he does not bear my name.”

“Oh! yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance.
I met the letters in my way this morning, and seeing my
son’s hand, presumed to open it—though it was not directed to me—it was
to Mrs.
I
hardly ever get a letter.”

“And so you absolutely opened what was directed to her!
Oh!
Mr.
Mr.
Weston, I could
not have believed it of you!”

“Aye, we men are sad fellows.
Elton.—This letter tells us—it is a short letter—written in a hurry,
merely to give us notice—it tells us that they are all coming up to
town directly, on Mrs.
Enscombe is in Yorkshire?”

“Yes, they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London, a
considerable journey.”

“Yes, upon my word, very considerable.
Sixty-five miles farther than
from Maple Grove to London.
But what is distance, Mr.
Weston, to people
of large fortune?—You would be amazed to hear how my brother, Mr.
Suckling, sometimes flies about.
You will hardly believe me—but twice
in one week he and Mr.
Bragge went to London and back again with four
horses.”

“The evil of the distance from Enscombe,” said Mr.
In Frank’s last letter she complained, he
said, of being too weak to get into her conservatory without having
both his arm and his uncle’s!
I do indeed.
I always stand up for women—and I assure you,
if you knew how Selina feels with respect to sleeping at an inn, you
would not wonder at Mrs.
Churchill’s making incredible exertions to
avoid it.
Selina says it is quite horror to her—and I believe I have
caught a little of her nicety.
She always travels with her own sheets;
an excellent precaution.
Does Mrs.
Mrs.
Weston, do not mistake me.
Selina is no fine lady, I assure
you.
Then she is no rule for Mrs.
She is very fond of Frank, and
therefore I would not speak ill of her.
Besides, she is out of health
now; but _that_ indeed, by her own account, she has always been.
Elton, but I have not much faith
in Mrs.
The fact is, I suppose, that she is tired of Enscombe.
She has now
been a longer time stationary there, than she ever was before, and she
begins to want change.
It is a retired place.
A fine place, but very
retired.”

“Aye—like Maple Grove, I dare say.
Nothing can stand more retired from
the road than Maple Grove.
Or, perhaps she may not have resources enough
in herself to be qualified for a country life.
He will find an _addition_ to the society
of Highbury when he comes again; that is, if I may presume to call
myself an addition.
But perhaps he may never have heard of there being
such a creature in the world.”

This was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed by, and Mr.
Weston, with a very good grace, immediately exclaimed,

“My dear madam!
Not heard of you!—I believe Mrs.
Weston’s letters lately have
been full of very little else than Mrs.
That is, _I_ always had a strong persuasion
he would be here again soon, I was sure something favourable would turn
up—but nobody believed me.
I have observed, Mrs.
Weston, perfectly true.
It is just what I used to say
to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship, when,
because things did not go quite right, did not proceed with all the
rapidity which suited his feelings, he was apt to be in despair, and
exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be _May_ before Hymen’s
saffron robe would be put on for us.
Oh! the pains I have been at to
dispel those gloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller views!
The
carriage—we had disappointments about the carriage;—one morning, I
remember, he came to me quite in despair.”

She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing, and Mr.
Weston instantly
seized the opportunity of going on.

“You were mentioning May.
Churchill is
ordered, or has ordered herself, to spend in some warmer place than
Enscombe—in short, to spend in London; so that we have the agreeable
prospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring—precisely the
season of the year which one should have chosen for it: days almost at
the longest; weather genial and pleasant, always inviting one out, and
never too hot for exercise.
Now will be the time.
Elton, whether the uncertainty of our meetings, the
sort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to-day or
to-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more friendly to happiness than
having him actually in the house.
I think it is so.
I hope you will be
pleased with my son; but you must not expect a prodigy.
Weston, I have very little doubt that my opinion
will be decidedly in his favour.
I have heard so much in praise of Mr.
I give you notice that as I find your son,
so I shall judge of him.—I am no flatterer.”

Mr.
If she is ill I should be sorry to do her injustice; but
there are some traits in her character which make it difficult for me
to speak of her with the forbearance I could wish.
You cannot be
ignorant, Mrs.
Elton, of my connexion with the family, nor of the
treatment I have met with; and, between ourselves, the whole blame of
it is to be laid to her.
Frank’s mother would
never have been slighted as she was but for her.
Mr.
She was nobody when he married her, barely
the daughter of a gentleman; but ever since her being turned into a
Churchill she has out-Churchill’d them all in high and mighty claims:
but in herself, I assure you, she is an upstart.”

“Only think! well, that must be infinitely provoking!
I have quite a
horror of upstarts.
Maple Grove has given me a thorough disgust to
people of that sort; for there is a family in that neighbourhood who
are such an annoyance to my brother and sister from the airs they give
themselves!
Your description of Mrs.
Churchill made me think of them
directly.
People of the name of Tupman, very lately settled there, and
encumbered with many low connexions, but giving themselves immense
airs, and expecting to be on a footing with the old established
families.
Weston.
One has not great hopes from Birmingham.
It is infinitely too bad.
Mr.
Suckling had completed
the purchase before his death.”

They were interrupted.
Tea was carrying round, and Mr.
Weston, and Mr.
Woodhouse to cards.
Knightley seemed
little disposed for conversation; Mrs.
Elton was wanting notice, which
nobody had inclination to pay, and she was herself in a worry of
spirits which would have made her prefer being silent.
Mr.
John Knightley proved more talkative than his brother.
You think so, do not you?”

“I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for your father—or even
may be some encumbrance to you, if your visiting engagements continue
to increase as much as they have done lately.”

“Increase!”

“Certainly; you must be sensible that the last half-year has made a
great difference in your way of life.”

“Difference!
Witness this very time.
Your neighbourhood is increasing,
and you mix more with it.
Cole’s, or balls
at the Crown.
And if they are, I
only beg you to send them home.”

“No,” cried Mr.
Knightley, “that need not be the consequence.
I shall certainly be at leisure.”

“Upon my word,” exclaimed Emma, “you amuse me!
These amazing engagements of mine—what
have they been?
John
Knightley)—your good fortune in meeting with so many of your friends at
once here, delights you too much to pass unnoticed.
But you, (turning
to Mr.
Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile; and succeeded without
difficulty, upon Mrs.
VOLUME III




CHAPTER I


A very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to the
nature of her agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill.
She
was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at all
apprehensive or embarrassed; it was for him.
Her own attachment had
really subsided into a mere nothing; it was not worth thinking of;—but
if he, who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in love of the
two, were to be returning with the same warmth of sentiment which he
had taken away, it would be very distressing.
Weston had
foreseen, before she had the power of forming some opinion of Frank
Churchill’s feelings.
He rode down for a couple of hours; he could not yet do more; but as he
came from Randalls immediately to Hartfield, she could then exercise
all her quick observation, and speedily determine how he was
influenced, and how she must act.
They met with the utmost
friendliness.
It was a clear thing he was less in love than he had
been.
Absence, with the conviction probably of her indifference, had
produced this very natural and very desirable effect.
He was in high spirits; as ready to talk and laugh as ever, and seemed
delighted to speak of his former visit, and recur to old stories: and
he was not without agitation.
He was not calm; his spirits were
evidently fluttered; there was restlessness about him.
Lively as he
was, it seemed a liveliness that did not satisfy himself; but what
decided her belief on the subject, was his staying only a quarter of an
hour, and hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury. “He had seen a
group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed—he had not
stopped, he would not stop for more than a word—but he had the vanity
to think they would be disappointed if he did not call, and much as he
wished to stay longer at Hartfield, he must hurry off.” She had no
doubt as to his being less in love—but neither his agitated spirits,
nor his hurrying away, seemed like a perfect cure; and she was rather
inclined to think it implied a dread of her returning power, and a
discreet resolution of not trusting himself with her long.
He was often hoping, intending to come—but was always prevented.
His
aunt could not bear to have him leave her.
Such was his own account at
Randall’s.
If he were quite sincere, if he really tried to come, it was
to be inferred that Mrs.
He did not believe it to proceed from any thing that
care and medicine might not remove, or at least that she might not have
many years of existence before her; but he could not be prevailed on,
by all his father’s doubts, to say that her complaints were merely
imaginary, or that she was as strong as ever.
She could not
endure its noise.
Her nerves were under continual irritation and
suffering; and by the ten days’ end, her nephew’s letter to Randalls
communicated a change of plan.
They were going to remove immediately to
Richmond.
Mrs.
Churchill had been recommended to the medical skill of
an eminent person there, and had otherwise a fancy for the place.
Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement,
and seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two months
before him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friends—for the
house was taken for May and June.
Weston understood these joyous prospects.
He was
considering her as the source of all the happiness they offered.
Weston’s own happiness was indisputable.
He was quite delighted.
What were nine miles to a
young man?—An hour’s ride.
Better than nearer!
One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this
removal,—the ball at the Crown.
It had not been forgotten before, but
it had been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day.
Now,
however, it was absolutely to be; every preparation was resumed, and
very soon after the Churchills had removed to Richmond, a few lines
from Frank, to say that his aunt felt already much better for the
change, and that he had no doubt of being able to join them for
twenty-four hours at any given time, induced them to name as early a
day as possible.
Mr.
Mrs.
Bates was engaged to
spend the evening at Hartfield, James had due notice, and he sanguinely
hoped that neither dear little Henry nor dear little John would have
any thing the matter with them, while dear Emma were gone.
The room at
the Crown was to witness it;—but it would be better than a common
meeting in a crowd.
Mr.
She was to convey Harriet, and they drove to the Crown in good
time, the Randalls party just sufficiently before them.
Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch; and though he did not
say much, his eyes declared that he meant to have a delightful evening.
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr.
The whole party walked
about, and looked, and praised again; and then, having nothing else to
do, formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observe in their
various modes, till other subjects were started, that, though _May_, a
fire in the evening was still very pleasant.
Weston’s fault that the number of privy
councillors was not yet larger.
Bates’s door
to offer the use of their carriage, but the aunt and niece were to be
brought by the Eltons.
Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there was a restlessness,
which shewed a mind not at ease.
Elton, I have heard so much of her.
It cannot be long, I think, before she comes.”

A carriage was heard.
Elton.
Weston, looking about. “We
thought you were to bring them.”

The mistake had been slight.
Emma
longed to know what Frank’s first opinion of Mrs.
He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion,
by giving her very proper attention, after the introduction had passed.
In a few minutes the carriage returned.—Somebody talked of rain.—“I
will see that there are umbrellas, sir,” said Frank to his father:
“Miss Bates must not be forgotten:” and away he went.
Mr.
You know I candidly told you
I should form my own opinion; and I am happy to say that I am extremely
pleased with him.—You may believe me.
I never compliment.
You must know I have a vast dislike to puppies—quite a horror of them.
They were never tolerated at Maple Grove.
Neither Mr.
Selina, who is mild almost to a fault, bore with them
much better.”

While she talked of his son, Mr.
Mrs.
Elton turned to Mrs.
You may be very sure I shall always take care of _them_.”

Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two gentlemen, walked into
the room; and Mrs.
Elton seemed to think it as much her duty as Mrs.
This is brilliant indeed!—This is
admirable!—Excellently contrived, upon my word.
Oh!
Mr.
Good Mrs.
Stokes would not know her own room again.
I saw her as
I came in; she was standing in the entrance. ‘Oh!
Mrs.
Weston.—“Very
well, I thank you, ma’am.
I hope you are quite well.
Ah! dear Mrs.
Weston, on that score.
Gone to Mr.
Woodhouse’s.
I made her take her shawl—for the evenings are not
warm—her large new shawl— Mrs.
Bought at Weymouth, you know—Mr.
Dixon’s choice.
There were three others, Jane says, which they hesitated about some
time.
Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive.
My dear Jane, are you
sure you did not wet your feet?—It was but a drop or two, but I am so
afraid:—but Mr.
Frank Churchill was so extremely—and there was a mat to
step upon—I shall never forget his extreme politeness.—Oh!
Mr.
My mother often talks of
your good-nature.
Does not she, Jane?—Do not we often talk of Mr.
This is meeting quite in
fairy-land!—Such a transformation!—Must not compliment, I know (eyeing
Emma most complacently)—that would be rude—but upon my word, Miss
Woodhouse, you do look—how do you like Jane’s hair?—You are a
judge.—She did it all herself.
Quite wonderful how she does her
hair!—No hairdresser from London I think could.—Ah!
Hughes.
Must go and speak to Dr. and Mrs.
This is
delightful, is not it?—Where’s dear Mr.
Richard?—Oh! there he is.
Much better employed talking to the young ladies.
How do
you do, Mr.
Richard?—I saw you the other day as you rode through the
town—Mrs.
Never
better.—Don’t I hear another carriage?—Who can this be?—very likely the
worthy Coles.—Upon my word, this is charming to be standing about among
such friends!
Elton then said, “Nobody can think less of dress in
general than I do—but upon such an occasion as this, when every body’s
eyes are so much upon me, and in compliment to the Westons—who I have
no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour—I would not wish
to be inferior to others.
I like him very well.”

At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could not
but imagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want to hear
more;—and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till
another suspension brought Mrs.
Elton had just joined them, and his wife was exclaiming,

“Oh! you have found us out at last, have you, in our seclusion?—I was
this moment telling Jane, I thought you would begin to be impatient for
tidings of us.”

“Jane!”—repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of surprize and
displeasure.—“That is easy—but Miss Fairfax does not disapprove it, I
suppose.”

“How do you like Mrs.
Elton?” said Emma in a whisper.

“Not at all.”

“You are ungrateful.”

“Ungrateful!—What do you mean?” Then changing from a frown to a
smile—“No, do not tell me—I do not want to know what you mean.—Where is
my father?—When are we to begin dancing?”

Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in an odd humour.
Weston.
It had just occurred to Mrs.
Elton
must be asked to begin the ball; that she would expect it; which
interfered with all their wishes of giving Emma that distinction.—Emma
heard the sad truth with fortitude.

“And what are we to do for a proper partner for her?” said Mr.
Weston.
“She will think Frank ought to ask her.”

Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise; and
boasted himself an engaged man, which his father looked his most
perfect approbation of—and it then appeared that Mrs.
Elton himself, and that their business
was to help to persuade him into it, which was done pretty soon.—Mr.
It was
almost enough to make her think of marrying.
Elton had undoubtedly
the advantage, at this time, in vanity completely gratified; for though
she had intended to begin with Frank Churchill, she could not lose by
the change.
Weston might be his son’s superior.—In spite of this
little rub, however, Emma was smiling with enjoyment, delighted to see
the respectable length of the set as it was forming, and to feel that
she had so many hours of unusual festivity before her.—She was more
disturbed by Mr.
Knightley’s not dancing than by any thing else.—There
he was, among the standers-by, where he ought not to be; he ought to be
dancing,—not classing himself with the husbands, and fathers, and
whist-players, who were pretending to feel an interest in the dance
till their rubbers were made up,—so young as he looked!—He could not
have appeared to greater advantage perhaps anywhere, than where he had
placed himself.
His tall, firm, upright figure, among the bulky forms
and stooping shoulders of the elderly men, was such as Emma felt must
draw every body’s eyes; and, excepting her own partner, there was not
one among the whole row of young men who could be compared with him.—He
moved a few steps nearer, and those few steps were enough to prove in
how gentlemanlike a manner, with what natural grace, he must have
danced, would he but take the trouble.—Whenever she caught his eye, she
forced him to smile; but in general he was looking grave.
There was nothing like flirtation between her and
her partner.
They seemed more like cheerful, easy friends, than lovers.
Weston, were not thrown away.
There was one, however, which Emma thought something
of.—The two last dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had no
partner;—the only young lady sitting down;—and so equal had been
hitherto the number of dancers, that how there could be any one
disengaged was the wonder!—But Emma’s wonder lessened soon afterwards,
on seeing Mr.
He would not ask Harriet to dance
if it were possible to be avoided: she was sure he would not—and she
was expecting him every moment to escape into the card-room.
Escape, however, was not his plan.
He came to the part of the room
where the sitters-by were collected, spoke to some, and walked about in
front of them, as if to shew his liberty, and his resolution of
maintaining it.
He did not omit being sometimes directly before Miss
Smith, or speaking to those who were close to her.—Emma saw it.
Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable of a dialogue
which just then took place between him and Mrs.
Weston had left her seat to join
him and say, “Do not you dance, Mr.
Elton?” to which his prompt reply
was, “Most readily, Mrs.
Weston, if you will dance with me.”

“Me!—oh! no—I would get you a better partner than myself.
Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a young lady
disengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing—Miss Smith.” “Miss
Smith!—oh!—I had not observed.—You are extremely obliging—and if I were
not an old married man.—But my dancing days are over, Mrs.
You
will excuse me.
Any thing else I should be most happy to do, at your
command—but my dancing days are over.”

Mrs.
Elton!
the amiable, obliging, gentle Mr.
She would not look again.
In another moment a happier sight caught her;—Mr.
His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it, extremely good;
and Harriet would have seemed almost too lucky, if it had not been for
the cruel state of things before, and for the very complete enjoyment
and very high sense of the distinction which her happy features
announced.
It was not thrown away on her, she bounded higher than ever,
flew farther down the middle, and was in a continual course of smiles.
Mr.
She says she is afraid there
will be draughts in the passage, though every thing has been done—One
door nailed up—Quantities of matting—My dear Jane, indeed you must.
How well you put it on!—so
gratified!
Excellent dancing indeed!—Yes, my dear, I ran home, as I
said I should, to help grandmama to bed, and got back again, and nobody
missed me.—I set off without saying a word, just as I told you.
Grandmama was quite well, had a charming evening with Mr.
Woodhouse, a
vast deal of chat, and backgammon.—Tea was made downstairs, biscuits
and baked apples and wine before she came away: amazing luck in some of
her throws: and she inquired a great deal about you, how you were
amused, and who were your partners. ‘Oh!’ said I, ‘I shall not
forestall Jane; I left her dancing with Mr.
William Cox.’
My dear sir, you are too obliging.—Is there nobody you would not
rather?—I am not helpless.
Upon my word, Jane
on one arm, and me on the other!—Stop, stop, let us stand a little
back, Mrs.
Quite the queen
of the evening!—Well, here we are at the passage.
How very odd!
I was convinced there were two, and there
is but one.
I never saw any thing equal to the comfort and
style—Candles everywhere.—I was telling you of your grandmama,
Jane,—There was a little disappointment.—The baked apples and biscuits,
excellent in their way, you know; but there was a delicate fricassee of
sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at first, and good Mr.
Now there is nothing grandmama loves better than sweetbread
and asparagus—so she was rather disappointed, but we agreed we would
not speak of it to any body, for fear of its getting round to dear Miss
Woodhouse, who would be so very much concerned!—Well, this is
brilliant!
I am all amazement! could not have supposed any thing!—Such
elegance and profusion!—I have seen nothing like it since—Well, where
shall we sit? where shall we sit?
Churchill—only it seems too good—but just as
you please.
Bless me!
I should not be helped so soon, but it smells most excellent,
and I cannot help beginning.”

Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr.
He was warm in his
reprobation of Mr.
Elton’s looks also received the due share of censure.

“They aimed at wounding more than Harriet,” said he. “Emma, why is it
that they are your enemies?”

He looked with smiling penetration; and, on receiving no answer, added,
“_She_ ought not to be angry with you, I suspect, whatever he may
be.—To that surmise, you say nothing, of course; but confess, Emma,
that you did want him to marry Harriet.”

“I did,” replied Emma, “and they cannot forgive me.”

He shook his head; but there was a smile of indulgence with it, and he
only said,

“I shall not scold you.
Elton is totally without.
Every body is lazy!
She hesitated a moment, and then replied, “With you, if you will ask
me.”

“Will you?” said he, offering his hand.

“Indeed I will.
It was one of the agreeable recollections of the ball, which
she walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.—She was extremely
glad that they had come to so good an understanding respecting the
Eltons, and that their opinions of both husband and wife were so much
alike; and his praise of Harriet, his concession in her favour, was
peculiarly gratifying.
Elton was not the
superior creature she had believed him.
The fever was over, and Emma
could harbour little fear of the pulse being quickened again by
injurious courtesy.
She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for
supplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be farther
requisite.—Harriet rational, Frank Churchill not too much in love, and
Mr.
He had told her that
he could not allow himself the pleasure of stopping at Hartfield, as he
was to be at home by the middle of the day.
Harriet looked white and frightened, and he was trying to cheer
her.—The iron gates and the front-door were not twenty yards
asunder;—they were all three soon in the hall, and Harriet immediately
sinking into a chair fainted away.
A young lady who faints, must be recovered; questions must be answered,
and surprizes be explained.
A few minutes made Emma acquainted
with the whole.
Goddard’s, who had been also at the ball, had walked out together, and
taken a road, the Richmond road, which, though apparently public enough
for safety, had led them into alarm.—About half a mile beyond Highbury,
making a sudden turn, and deeply shaded by elms on each side, it became
for a considerable stretch very retired; and when the young ladies had
advanced some way into it, they had suddenly perceived at a small
distance before them, on a broader patch of greensward by the side, a
party of gipsies.
How the trampers might have behaved, had the young ladies been more
courageous, must be doubtful; but such an invitation for attack could
not be resisted; and Harriet was soon assailed by half a dozen
children, headed by a stout woman and a great boy, all clamorous, and
impertinent in look, though not absolutely in word.—More and more
frightened, she immediately promised them money, and taking out her
purse, gave them a shilling, and begged them not to want more, or to
use her ill.—She was then able to walk, though but slowly, and was
moving away—but her terror and her purse were too tempting, and she was
followed, or rather surrounded, by the whole gang, demanding more.
By a most fortunate chance his
leaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him to her assistance
at this critical moment.
The
terror which the woman and boy had been creating in Harriet was then
their own portion.
He had left them completely frightened; and Harriet
eagerly clinging to him, and hardly able to speak, had just strength
enough to reach Hartfield, before her spirits were quite overcome.
Goddard, and notice of there being such a set of people
in the neighbourhood to Mr.
Such an adventure as this,—a fine young man and a lovely young woman
thrown together in such a way, could hardly fail of suggesting certain
ideas to the coldest heart and the steadiest brain.
Could a linguist, could a grammarian, could even a mathematician
have seen what she did, have witnessed their appearance together, and
heard their history of it, without feeling that circumstances had been
at work to make them peculiarly interesting to each other?—How much
more must an imaginist, like herself, be on fire with speculation and
foresight!—especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as her
mind had already made.
It was a very extraordinary thing!
Nothing of the sort had ever
occurred before to any young ladies in the place, within her memory; no
rencontre, no alarm of the kind;—and now it had happened to the very
person, and at the very hour, when the other very person was chancing
to pass by to rescue her!—It certainly was very extraordinary!—And
knowing, as she did, the favourable state of mind of each at this
period, it struck her the more.
He was wishing to get the better of his
attachment to herself, she just recovering from her mania for Mr.
It seemed as if every thing united to promise the most
interesting consequences.
In the few minutes’ conversation which she had yet had with him, while
Harriet had been partially insensible, he had spoken of her terror, her
naïveté, her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm, with a
sensibility amused and delighted; and just at last, after Harriet’s own
account had been given, he had expressed his indignation at the
abominable folly of Miss Bickerton in the warmest terms.
Every thing
was to take its natural course, however, neither impelled nor assisted.
It was no more than a wish.
Beyond it she would on no account
proceed.
Within half an hour
it was known all over Highbury.
It was the very event to engage those
who talk most, the young and the low; and all the youth and servants in
the place were soon in the happiness of frightful news.
Poor Mr.
She had
an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man, for
she hardly knew what indisposition was; and if he did not invent
illnesses for her, she could make no figure in a message.
The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice; they took
themselves off in a hurry.
CHAPTER IV


A very few days had passed after this adventure, when Harriet came one
morning to Emma with a small parcel in her hand, and after sitting down
and hesitating, thus began:

“Miss Woodhouse—if you are at leisure—I have something that I should
like to tell you—a sort of confession to make—and then, you know, it
will be over.”

Emma was a good deal surprized; but begged her to speak.
As I am happily quite an altered
creature in _one_ _respect_, it is very fit that you should have the
satisfaction of knowing it.
I do not want to say more than is
necessary—I am too much ashamed of having given way as I have done, and
I dare say you understand me.”

“Yes,” said Emma, “I hope I do.”

“How I could so long a time be fancying myself!...” cried Harriet,
warmly. “It seems like madness!
Her curiosity was greatly excited.
Harriet unfolded the parcel, and she looked on with impatience.
I should not have thought it possible you could forget what
passed in this very room about court-plaister, one of the very last
times we ever met in it!—It was but a very few days before I had my
sore throat—just before Mr. and Mrs.
John Knightley came—I think the
very evening.—Do not you remember his cutting his finger with your new
penknife, and your recommending court-plaister?—But, as you had none
about you, and knew I had, you desired me to supply him; and so I took
mine out and cut him a piece; but it was a great deal too large, and he
cut it smaller, and kept playing some time with what was left, before
he gave it back to me.
Remember it?
Aye, I remember it all now; all, except your saving this
relic—I knew nothing of that till this moment—but the cutting the
finger, and my recommending court-plaister, and saying I had none about
me!—Oh! my sins, my sins!—And I had plenty all the while in my
pocket!—One of my senseless tricks!—I deserve to be under a continual
blush all the rest of my life.—Well—(sitting down again)—go on—what
else?”

“And had you really some at hand yourself?
I am sure I never suspected
it, you did it so naturally.”

“And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister by for his sake!”
said Emma, recovering from her state of shame and feeling divided
between wonder and amusement.
I
never was equal to this.”

“Here,” resumed Harriet, turning to her box again, “here is something
still more valuable, I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable, because
this is what did really once belong to him, which the court-plaister
never did.”

Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure.
But I kept my eye on it; and, as soon as I
dared, caught it up, and never parted with it again from that moment.”

“I do remember it,” cried Emma; “I perfectly remember it.—Talking about
spruce-beer.—Oh! yes—Mr.
I perfectly
remember it.—Stop; Mr.
I
have an idea he was standing just here.”

“Ah!
Elton was sitting here, I remember, much about where I
am now.”—

“Well, go on.”

“Oh! that’s all.
I have nothing more to shew you, or to say—except that
I am now going to throw them both behind the fire, and I wish you to
see me do it.”

“My poor dear Harriet! and have you actually found happiness in
treasuring up these things?”

“Yes, simpleton as I was!—but I am quite ashamed of it now, and wish I
could forget as easily as I can burn them.
It was very wrong of me, you
know, to keep any remembrances, after he was married.
I knew it was—but
had not resolution enough to part with them.”

“But, Harriet, is it necessary to burn the court-plaister?—I have not a
word to say for the bit of old pencil, but the court-plaister might be
useful.”

“I shall be happier to burn it,” replied Harriet. “It has a
disagreeable look to me.
I must get rid of every thing.—There it goes,
and there is an end, thank Heaven! of Mr.
She merely said, in
the course of some trivial chat, “Well, Harriet, whenever you marry I
would advise you to do so and so”—and thought no more of it, till after
a minute’s silence she heard Harriet say in a very serious tone, “I
shall never marry.”

Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it was; and after a
moment’s debate, as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not,
replied,

“Never marry!—This is a new resolution.”

“It is one that I shall never change, however.”

After another short hesitation, “I hope it does not proceed from—I hope
it is not in compliment to Mr.
Elton?”

“Mr.
She had previously determined how far she would proceed,
on any application of the sort; and it would be safer for both, to have
the judicious law of her own brain laid down with speed.—She was
decided, and thus spoke—

“Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning.
Is not it so?”

“Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption to suppose—
Indeed I am not so mad.—But it is a pleasure to me to admire him at a
distance—and to think of his infinite superiority to all the rest of
the world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which are so
proper, in me especially.”

“I am not at all surprized at you, Harriet.
The service he rendered you
was enough to warm your heart.”

“Service! oh! it was such an inexpressible obligation!—The very
recollection of it, and all that I felt at the time—when I saw him
coming—his noble look—and my wretchedness before.
Such a change!
In one
moment such a change!
It is natural, and it is honourable.—Yes,
honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.—But that it
will be a fortunate preference is more than I can promise.
I do not
advise you to give way to it, Harriet.
Consider what you are about.
Perhaps it will be
wisest in you to check your feelings while you can: at any rate do not
let them carry you far, unless you are persuaded of his liking you.
Be
observant of him.
Let his behaviour be the guide of your sensations.
Henceforward I
know nothing of the matter.
We were
very wrong before; we will be cautious now.—He is your superior, no
doubt, and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious
nature; but yet, Harriet, more wonderful things have taken place, there
have been matches of greater disparity.
I
would not have you too sanguine; though, however it may end, be assured
your raising your thoughts to _him_, is a mark of good taste which I
shall always know how to value.”

Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude.
Its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind—and it must
be saving her from the danger of degradation.
The
Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings, and of the use
to be made of their barouche-landau; and Jane Fairfax was still at her
grandmother’s; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was
again delayed, and August, instead of Midsummer, fixed for it, she was
likely to remain there full two months longer, provided at least she
were able to defeat Mrs.
Elton’s activity in her service, and save
herself from being hurried into a delightful situation against her
will.
Mr.
Knightley, who, for some reason best known to himself, had
certainly taken an early dislike to Frank Churchill, was only growing
to dislike him more.
He began to suspect him of some double dealing in
his pursuit of Emma.
Every thing declared it; his own attentions, his father’s hints, his
mother-in-law’s guarded silence; it was all in unison; words, conduct,
discretion, and indiscretion, told the same story.
He had walked up one day after dinner, as he very often did, to spend
his evening at Hartfield.
Emma and Harriet were going to walk; he
joined them; and, on returning, they fell in with a larger party, who,
like themselves, judged it wisest to take their exercise early, as the
weather threatened rain; Mr. and Mrs.
Weston and their son, Miss Bates
and her niece, who had accidentally met.
They all united; and, on
reaching Hartfield gates, Emma, who knew it was exactly the sort of
visiting that would be welcome to her father, pressed them all to go in
and drink tea with him.
The Randalls party agreed to it immediately;
and after a pretty long speech from Miss Bates, which few persons
listened to, she also found it possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse’s
most obliging invitation.
As they were turning into the grounds, Mr.
The gentlemen spoke of his horse.

“By the bye,” said Frank Churchill to Mrs.
Perry’s plan of setting up his carriage?”

Mrs.
Weston looked surprized, and said, “I did not know that he ever
had any such plan.”

“Nay, I had it from you.
I remember it perfectly.
You mentioned it as what was
certainly to be very soon.
Mrs.
It was owing to _her_ persuasion, as she
thought his being out in bad weather did him a great deal of harm.
You
must remember it now?”

“Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment.”

“Never! really, never!—Bless me! how could it be?—Then I must have
dreamt it—but I was completely persuaded—Miss Smith, you walk as if you
were tired.
You will not be sorry to find yourself at home.”

“What is this?—What is this?” cried Mr.
Weston, “about Perry and a
carriage?
I am glad he
can afford it.
Weston’s having
mentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe, many weeks ago, with
all these particulars—but as she declares she never heard a syllable of
it before, of course it must have been a dream.
I
dream of every body at Highbury when I am away—and when I have gone
through my particular friends, then I begin dreaming of Mr. and Mrs.
Perry.”

“It is odd though,” observed his father, “that you should have had such
a regular connected dream about people whom it was not very likely you
should be thinking of at Enscombe.
Emma, you are a great dreamer, I think?”

Emma was out of hearing.
She had hurried on before her guests to
prepare her father for their appearance, and was beyond the reach of
Mr.
Frank Churchill might have—I do not mean
to say that he did not dream it—I am sure I have sometimes the oddest
dreams in the world—but if I am questioned about it, I must acknowledge
that there was such an idea last spring; for Mrs.
Perry herself
mentioned it to my mother, and the Coles knew of it as well as
ourselves—but it was quite a secret, known to nobody else, and only
thought of about three days.
Jane, don’t you remember
grandmama’s telling us of it when we got home?
Mrs.
At the same time, I will not positively answer for my having
never dropt a hint, because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing
before I am aware.
I will answer for it _she_ never betrayed the
least thing in the world.
Mr.
Knightley’s eyes had preceded Miss
Bates’s in a glance at Jane.
Weston had walked in.
Knightley suspected in Frank
Churchill the determination of catching her eye—he seemed watching her
intently—in vain, however, if it were so—Jane passed between them into
the hall, and looked at neither.
There was no time for farther remark or explanation.
Knightley must take his seat with the rest round
the large modern circular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield,
and which none but Emma could have had power to place there and
persuade her father to use, instead of the small-sized Pembroke, on
which two of his daily meals had, for forty years been crowded.
This is a sort of dull-looking evening, that ought to be treated
rather as winter than summer.
We had great amusement with those letters
one morning.
They were rapidly forming words
for each other, or for any body else who would be puzzled.
The
quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for Mr.
Weston had occasionally introduced, and who now sat happily occupied in
lamenting, with tender melancholy, over the departure of the “poor
little boys,” or in fondly pointing out, as he took up any stray letter
near him, how beautifully Emma had written it.
Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax.
Frank was next to
Emma, Jane opposite to them—and Mr.
Knightley so placed as to see them
all; and it was his object to see as much as he could, with as little
apparent observation.
If meant to be immediately mixed with the others, and
buried from sight, she should have looked on the table instead of
looking just across, for it was not mixed; and Harriet, eager after
every fresh word, and finding out none, directly took it up, and fell
to work.
She was sitting by Mr.
The word was _blunder_; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it, there
was a blush on Jane’s cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwise
ostensible.
Mr.
How the delicacy, the discretion
of his favourite could have been so lain asleep!
It was a child’s play, chosen to conceal a deeper
game on Frank Churchill’s part.
He saw that Emma had soon made it out, and found it highly
entertaining, though it was something which she judged it proper to
appear to censure; for she said, “Nonsense! for shame!” He heard Frank
Churchill next say, with a glance towards Jane, “I will give it to
her—shall I?”—and as clearly heard Emma opposing it with eager laughing
warmth. “No, no, you must not; you shall not, indeed.”

It was done however.
Mr.
Jane Fairfax’s perception seemed to accompany his; her
comprehension was certainly more equal to the covert meaning, the
superior intelligence, of those five letters so arranged.
Her face was averted from those who had made the
attack, and turned towards her aunt.

“Aye, very true, my dear,” cried the latter, though Jane had not spoken
a word—“I was just going to say the same thing.
It is time for us to be
going indeed.
My dear sir, you are too obliging.
We really must wish you good
night.”

Jane’s alertness in moving, proved her as ready as her aunt had
preconceived.
She was immediately up, and wanting to quit the table;
but so many were also moving, that she could not get away; and Mr.
Knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed
towards her, and resolutely swept away by her unexamined.
She was
afterwards looking for her shawl—Frank Churchill was looking also—it
was growing dusk, and the room was in confusion; and how they parted,
Mr.
Knightley could not tell.
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his thoughts full of what
he had seen; so full, that when the candles came to assist his
observations, he must—yes, he certainly must, as a friend—an anxious
friend—give Emma some hint, ask her some question.
It was
his duty.

“Pray, Emma,” said he, “may I ask in what lay the great amusement, the
poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax?
She could not endure to give him the true
explanation; for though her suspicions were by no means removed, she
was really ashamed of having ever imparted them.

“Oh!” she cried in evident embarrassment, “it all meant nothing; a mere
joke among ourselves.”

“The joke,” he replied gravely, “seemed confined to you and Mr.
He sat a little while in
doubt.
Emma’s confusion, and the acknowledged intimacy, seemed
to declare her affection engaged.
Yet he would speak.
Oh! yes, perfectly.—Why
do you make a doubt of it?”

“Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her, or
that she admired him?”

“Never, never!” she cried with a most open eagerness—“Never, for the
twentieth part of a moment, did such an idea occur to me.
I am delighted to find that you can
vouchsafe to let your imagination wander—but it will not do—very sorry
to check you in your first essay—but indeed it will not do.
That is, I _presume_ it to be so on her side, and I
can _answer_ for its being so on his.
Knightley.
Woodhouse’s tender habits required almost
every evening throughout the year, he soon afterwards took a hasty
leave, and walked home to the coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey.
CHAPTER VI


After being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from Mr. and Mrs.
No such
importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at
present.
Churchill,
whose health seemed every day to supply a different report, and the
situation of Mrs.
It was the delay of a great deal
of pleasure and parade.
Her introductions and recommendations must all
wait, and every projected party be still only talked of.
Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the
Sucklings did not come?
They could go there again with them in the
autumn.
It was settled that they should go to Box Hill.
Weston that he had been proposing to Mrs.
Now, as her objection was nothing
but her very great dislike of Mrs.
Elton’s party!
Every feeling was offended; and
the forbearance of her outward submission left a heavy arrear due of
secret severity in her reflections on the unmanageable goodwill of Mr.
One cannot have too large a party.
One could not
leave her out.”

Emma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none of it in private.
It was now the middle of June, and the weather fine; and Mrs.
Elton was
growing impatient to name the day, and settle with Mr.
Mrs.
Before this time last year I assure you we had had a delightful
exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston.”

“You had better explore to Donwell,” replied Mr.
Knightley. “That may
be done without horses.
They are
ripening fast.”

If Mr.
I should like
it of all things,” was not plainer in words than manner.
Donwell was
famous for its strawberry-beds, which seemed a plea for the invitation:
but no plea was necessary; cabbage-beds would have been enough to tempt
the lady, who only wanted to be going somewhere.
She promised him again
and again to come—much oftener than he doubted—and was extremely
gratified by such a proof of intimacy, such a distinguishing compliment
as she chose to consider it.

“You may depend upon me,” said she. “I certainly will come.
Only give me a carte-blanche.—I am Lady
Patroness, you know.
It is my party.
I will bring friends with me.”

“I hope you will bring Elton,” said he: “but I will not trouble you to
give any other invitations.”

“Oh! now you are looking very sly.
But consider—you need not be afraid
of delegating power to _me_.
It is my party.
Elton, rather mortified.

“No—Mrs.
Knightley;—and till she is in being, I will manage such
matters myself.”

“Ah! you are an odd creature!” she cried, satisfied to have no one
preferred to herself.—“You are a humourist, and may say what you like.
Quite a humourist.
Well, I shall bring Jane with me—Jane and her
aunt.—The rest I leave to you.
I have no objections at all to meeting
the Hartfield family.
I
shall wear a large bonnet, and bring one of my little baskets hanging
on my arm.
Nothing can be
more simple, you see.
And Jane will have such another.
There is to be
no form or parade—a sort of gipsy party.
When you are tired of eating
strawberries in the garden, there shall be cold meat in the house.”

“Well—as you please; only don’t have a great set out.
And, by the bye,
can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion?—Pray be
sincere, Knightley.
If you wish me to talk to Mrs.
The thing would be for us all to come on
donkeys, Jane, Miss Bates, and me—and my caro sposo walking by.
Donwell Lane
is never dusty, and now it is perfectly dry.
You can borrow Mrs.
I would wish every thing
to be as much to your taste as possible.”

“That I am sure you would.
Under that peculiar sort of dry, blunt manner, I know you have the
warmest heart.
E., you are a thorough humourist.—Yes,
believe me, Knightley, I am fully sensible of your attention to me in
the whole of this scheme.
Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade.
He
wished to persuade Mr.
He was invited on good faith.
No lurking horrors were to upbraid him
for his easy credulity.
He did consent.
He had not been at Donwell for
two years. “Some very fine morning, he, and Emma, and Harriet, could go
very well; and he could sit still with Mrs.
Weston, while the dear
girls walked about the gardens.
Elton,
and any other of his neighbours.—He could not see any objection at all
to his, and Emma’s, and Harriet’s going there some very fine morning.
He thought it very well done of Mr.
Knightley to invite them—very kind
and sensible—much cleverer than dining out.—He was not fond of dining
out.”

Mr.
The
invitation was everywhere so well received, that it seemed as if, like
Mrs.
Weston, unasked, promised to get Frank over
to join them, if possible; a proof of approbation and gratitude which
could have been dispensed with.—Mr.
Knightley was then obliged to say
that he should be glad to see him; and Mr.
Weston engaged to lose no
time in writing, and spare no arguments to induce him to come.
Under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer, Mr.
Woodhouse was
safely conveyed in his carriage, with one window down, to partake of
this al-fresco party; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the
Abbey, especially prepared for him by a fire all the morning, he was
happily placed, quite at his ease, ready to talk with pleasure of what
had been achieved, and advise every body to come and sit down, and not
to heat themselves.—Mrs.
Weston, who seemed to have walked there on
purpose to be tired, and sit all the time with him, remained, when all
the others were invited or persuaded out, his patient listener and
sympathiser.
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that as soon as she
was satisfied of her father’s comfort, she was glad to leave him, and
look around her; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more
particular observation, more exact understanding of a house and grounds
which must ever be so interesting to her and all her family.
She felt all the honest pride and complacency which her alliance with
the present and future proprietor could fairly warrant, as she viewed
the respectable size and style of the building, its suitable, becoming,
characteristic situation, low and sheltered—its ample gardens
stretching down to meadows washed by a stream, of which the Abbey, with
all the old neglect of prospect, had scarcely a sight—and its abundance
of timber in rows and avenues, which neither fashion nor extravagance
had rooted up.—The house was larger than Hartfield, and totally unlike
it, covering a good deal of ground, rambling and irregular, with many
comfortable, and one or two handsome rooms.—It was just what it ought
to be, and it looked what it was—and Emma felt an increasing respect
for it, as the residence of a family of such true gentility, untainted
in blood and understanding.—Some faults of temper John Knightley had;
but Isabella had connected herself unexceptionably.
Elton and Jane Fairfax were talking of.—A situation,
a most desirable situation, was in question.
Elton had received
notice of it that morning, and was in raptures.
Bragge, an
acquaintance of Mrs.
Suckling, a lady known at Maple Grove.
Elton was wild to have the offer closed with
immediately.—On her side, all was warmth, energy, and triumph—and she
positively refused to take her friend’s negative, though Miss Fairfax
continued to assure her that she would not at present engage in any
thing, repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge
before.—Still Mrs.
Would not Mr.
It was hot; and after walking some time over the gardens in a
scattered, dispersed way, scarcely any three together, they insensibly
followed one another to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of
limes, which stretching beyond the garden at an equal distance from the
river, seemed the finish of the pleasure grounds.—It led to nothing;
nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars,
which seemed intended, in their erection, to give the appearance of an
approach to the house, which never had been there.
It was a sweet view—sweet to the eye and the mind.
Mr.
Knightley and
Harriet!—It was an odd tête-à-tête; but she was glad to see it.—There
had been a time when he would have scorned her as a companion, and
turned from her with little ceremony.
There had been a time also when Emma would have been
sorry to see Harriet in a spot so favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm;
but now she feared it not.
He was giving Harriet information as to modes of
agriculture, etc. and Emma received a smile which seemed to say, “These
are my own concerns.
I have a right to talk on such subjects, without
being suspected of introducing Robert Martin.”—She did not suspect him.
It was too old a story.—Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of
Harriet.—They took a few turns together along the walk.—The shade was
most refreshing, and Emma found it the pleasantest part of the day.
The next remove was to the house; they must all go in and eat;—and they
were all seated and busy, and still Frank Churchill did not come.
His father would not own himself
uneasy, and laughed at her fears; but she could not be cured of wishing
that he would part with his black mare.
Weston was at last persuaded to believe, or to say,
that it must be by some attack of Mrs.
The cold repast was over, and the party were to go out once more to see
what had not yet been seen, the old Abbey fish-ponds; perhaps get as
far as the clover, which was to be begun cutting on the morrow, or, at
any rate, have the pleasure of being hot, and growing cool again.—Mr.
Woodhouse, who had already taken his little round in the highest part
of the gardens, where no damps from the river were imagined even by
him, stirred no more; and his daughter resolved to remain with him,
that Mrs.
Weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise
and variety which her spirits seemed to need.
Knightley had done all in his power for Mr.
Woodhouse’s
entertainment.
Books of engravings, drawers of medals, cameos, corals,
shells, and every other family collection within his cabinets, had been
prepared for his old friend, to while away the morning; and the
kindness had perfectly answered.
Mr.
Woodhouse had been exceedingly
well amused.
It would only be giving trouble and distress.
Some are gone to
the ponds, and some to the lime walk.
Till they all come in I shall not
be missed; and when they do, will you have the goodness to say that I
am gone?”

“Certainly, if you wish it;—but you are not going to walk to Highbury
alone?”

“Yes—what should hurt me?—I walk fast.
I shall be at home in twenty
minutes.”

“But it is too far, indeed it is, to be walking quite alone.
Let my
father’s servant go with you.—Let me order the carriage.
It can be
round in five minutes.”

“Thank you, thank you—but on no account.—I would rather walk.—And for
_me_ to be afraid of walking alone!—I, who may so soon have to guard
others!”

She spoke with great agitation; and Emma very feelingly replied, “That
can be no reason for your being exposed to danger now.
I must order the
carriage.
The heat even would be danger.—You are fatigued already.”

“I am,”—she answered—“I am fatigued; but it is not the sort of
fatigue—quick walking will refresh me.—Miss Woodhouse, we all know at
times what it is to be wearied in spirits.
The greatest kindness you can shew me, will be to let me
have my own way, and only say that I am gone when it is necessary.”

Emma had not another word to oppose.
She saw it all; and entering into
her feelings, promoted her quitting the house immediately, and watched
her safely off with the zeal of a friend.
Emma had not been thinking of him, she had
forgotten to think of him—but she was very glad to see him.
Weston
would be at ease.
Churchill as the cause.
The heat was excessive; he had never suffered any thing
like it—almost wished he had staid at home—nothing killed him like
heat—he could bear any degree of cold, etc., but heat was
intolerable—and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from the
slight remains of Mr.
I met _one_ as I
came—Madness in such weather!—absolute madness!”

Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that Frank Churchill’s
state might be best defined by the expressive phrase of being out of
humour.
Some people were always cross when they were hot.
Such might be
his constitution; and as she knew that eating and drinking were often
the cure of such incidental complaints, she recommended his taking some
refreshment; he would find abundance of every thing in the
dining-room—and she humanely pointed out the door.

“No—he should not eat.
He was not hungry; it would only make him
hotter.” In two minutes, however, he relented in his own favour; and
muttering something about spruce-beer, walked off.
Emma returned all
her attention to her father, saying in secret—

“I am glad I have done being in love with him.
Harriet’s sweet easy
temper will not mind it.”

He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal, and came
back all the better—grown quite cool—and, with good manners, like
himself—able to draw a chair close to them, take an interest in their
employment; and regret, in a reasonable way, that he should be so late.
He was not in his best spirits, but seemed trying to improve them; and,
at last, made himself talk nonsense very agreeably.
They were looking
over views in Swisserland.

“As soon as my aunt gets well, I shall go abroad,” said he. “I shall
never be easy till I have seen some of these places.
You will have my
sketches, some time or other, to look at—or my tour to read—or my poem.
I shall do something to expose myself.”

“That may be—but not by sketches in Swisserland.
You will never go to
Swisserland.
A warm climate may be prescribed for
her.
I
assure you I have.
I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that I
shall soon be abroad.
I am tired of doing nothing.
You are quite mistaken.
I am thwarted in
every thing material.
I do not consider myself at all a fortunate
person.”

“You are not quite so miserable, though, as when you first came.
I shall sit by you.
It is not
Swisserland, but it will be something for a young man so much in want
of a change.
I can never bear to think of
you all there without me.”

“These are difficulties which you must settle for yourself.
Chuse your
own degree of crossness.
I shall press you no more.”

The rest of the party were now returning, and all were soon collected.
Frank
Churchill’s little inclination to exclude himself increased so much,
that his last words to Emma were,

“Well;—if _you_ wish me to stay and join the party, I will.”

She smiled her acceptance; and nothing less than a summons from
Richmond was to take him back before the following evening.
Weston directed the whole, officiating
safely between Hartfield and the Vicarage, and every body was in good
time.
Emma and Harriet went together; Miss Bates and her niece, with
the Eltons; the gentlemen on horseback.
Mrs.
Nothing was wanting but to be happy when they got there.
Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment, and every body
had a burst of admiration on first arriving; but in the general amount
of the day there was deficiency.
The Eltons walked together; Mr.
Knightley took
charge of Miss Bates and Jane; and Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank
Churchill.
And Mr.
It seemed at first an accidental division, but it never
materially varied.
Weston, to
remove.
At first it was downright dulness to Emma.
She had never seen Frank
Churchill so silent and stupid.
He said nothing worth hearing—looked
without seeing—admired without intelligence—listened without knowing
what she said.
When they all sat down it was better; to her taste a great deal better,
for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay, making her his first
object.
Every distinguishing attention that could be paid, was paid to
her.
To amuse her, and be agreeable in her eyes, seemed all that he
cared for—and Emma, glad to be enlivened, not sorry to be flattered,
was gay and easy too, and gave him all the friendly encouragement, the
admission to be gallant, which she had ever given in the first and most
animating period of their acquaintance; but which now, in her own
estimation, meant nothing, though in the judgment of most people
looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word but
flirtation could very well describe. “Mr.
She still intended him for her
friend.

“How much I am obliged to you,” said he, “for telling me to come
to-day!—If it had not been for you, I should certainly have lost all
the happiness of this party.
I had quite determined to go away again.”

“Yes, you were very cross; and I do not know what about, except that
you were too late for the best strawberries.
I was a kinder friend than
you deserved.
You begged hard to be commanded to
come.”

“Don’t say I was cross.
You had,
somehow or other, broken bounds yesterday, and run away from your own
management; but to-day you are got back again—and as I cannot be always
with you, it is best to believe your temper under your own command
rather than mine.”

“It comes to the same thing.
You order me, whether you speak or not.
You are always with me.”

“Dating from three o’clock yesterday.
I thought I had seen you
first in February.”

“Your gallantry is really unanswerable.
I saw you first in February.” And then
whispering—“Our companions are excessively stupid.
What shall we do to
rouse them?
They _shall_ talk.
Ladies and
gentlemen, I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever she is,
presides) to say, that she desires to know what you are all thinking
of?”

Some laughed, and answered good-humouredly.
Miss Bates said a great
deal; Mrs.
Elton swelled at the idea of Miss Woodhouse’s presiding; Mr.
Knightley’s answer was the most distinct.

“Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we are all
thinking of?”

“Oh! no, no”—cried Emma, laughing as carelessly as she could—“Upon no
account in the world.
It is the very last thing I would stand the brunt
of just now.
Weston and Harriet,) whose thoughts I might not be
afraid of knowing.”

“It is a sort of thing,” cried Mrs.
Elton emphatically, “which _I_
should not have thought myself privileged to inquire into.
Though,
perhaps, as the _Chaperon_ of the party—_I_ never was in any
circle—exploring parties—young ladies—married women—”

Her mutterings were chiefly to her husband; and he murmured, in reply,

“Very true, my love, very true.
Ladies and gentlemen—I
am ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say, that she waives her right of
knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of, and only requires
something very entertaining from each of you, in a general way.
I
shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my mouth,
shan’t I? (looking round with the most good-humoured dependence on
every body’s assent)—Do not you all think I shall?”

Emma could not resist.

“Ah! ma’am, but there may be a difficulty.
Pardon me—but you will be
limited as to number—only three at once.”

Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner, did not
immediately catch her meaning; but, when it burst on her, it could not
anger, though a slight blush shewed that it could pain her.

“Ah!—well—to be sure.
Knightley,) and I will try to hold my tongue.
I will do my
best.
I am making a conundrum.
A conundrum of Mr.
Weston’s shall clear him and his next neighbour.
Weston. “It is too
much a matter of fact, but here it is.—What two letters of the alphabet
are there, that express perfection?”

“What two letters!—express perfection!
I am sure I do not know.”

“Ah! you will never guess.
You, (to Emma), I am certain, will never
guess.—I will tell you.—M. and A.—Em-ma.—Do you understand?”

Understanding and gratification came together.
Knightley gravely said,

“This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted, and Mr.
Elton; “_I_
really cannot attempt—I am not at all fond of the sort of thing.
I knew who it came from.
An abominable puppy!—You know
who I mean (nodding to her husband).
I do not pretend to be a wit.
Churchill.
We
have nothing clever to say—not one of us.

“Yes, yes, pray pass _me_,” added her husband, with a sort of sneering
consciousness; “_I_ have nothing to say that can entertain Miss
Woodhouse, or any other young lady.
I am really tired of exploring so long on one spot.
Peculiarly lucky!—for as to
any real knowledge of a person’s disposition that Bath, or any public
place, can give—it is all nothing; there can be no knowledge.
It is
only by seeing women in their own homes, among their own set, just as
they always are, that you can form any just judgment.
How many a man
has committed himself on a short acquaintance, and rued it all the rest
of his life!”

Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except among her own
confederates, spoke now.

“Such things do occur, undoubtedly.”—She was stopped by a cough.
She recovered her voice.

“I was only going to observe, that though such unfortunate
circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and women, I cannot
imagine them to be very frequent.
You provide for the family, you know, (with a
smile at his father).
You shall have a charming
wife.”

“She must be very lively, and have hazle eyes.
I care for nothing else.
It was a commission to touch every
favourite feeling.
Would not Harriet be the very creature described?
Hazle eyes excepted, two years more might make her all that he wished.
Referring the education to her seemed to imply it.

“Now, ma’am,” said Jane to her aunt, “shall we join Mrs.
Elton?”

“If you please, my dear.
We shall
soon overtake her.
There she is—no, that’s somebody else.
Knightley.
Mr.
Weston, his son, Emma, and Harriet, only remained; and the young man’s
spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant.
The appearance of the servants looking out for them to
give notice of the carriages was a joyful sight; and even the bustle of
collecting and preparing to depart, and the solicitude of Mrs.
Knightley by her side.
I dare say she did not understand me.”

“I assure you she did.
She felt your full meaning.
She has talked of it
since.
Were she your equal in situation—but, Emma,
consider how far this is from being the case.
She is poor; she has sunk
from the comforts she was born to; and, if she live to old age, must
probably sink more.
He had
misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted, and her
tongue motionless.
She had not been able to speak; and,
on entering the carriage, sunk back for a moment overcome—then
reproaching herself for having taken no leave, making no
acknowledgment, parting in apparent sullenness, she looked out with
voice and hand eager to shew a difference; but it was just too late.
She continued to look
back, but in vain; and soon, with what appeared unusual speed, they
were half way down the hill, and every thing left far behind.
She was
vexed beyond what could have been expressed—almost beyond what she
could conceal.
The truth
of this representation there was no denying.
She felt it at her heart.
How could
she have exposed herself to such ill opinion in any one she valued!
And
how suffer him to leave her without saying one word of gratitude, of
concurrence, of common kindness!
Time did not compose her.
As she reflected more, she seemed but to feel
it more.
She never had been so depressed.
Happily it was not necessary
to speak.
CHAPTER VIII


The wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was in Emma’s thoughts all the
evening.
They, in their different homes, and their different ways,
might be looking back on it with pleasure; but in her view it was a
morning more completely misspent, more totally bare of rational
satisfaction at the time, and more to be abhorred in recollection, than
any she had ever passed.
She hoped no one could have said to her, “How could
you be so unfeeling to your father?—I must, I will tell you truths
while I can.” Miss Bates should never again—no, never!
If attention, in
future, could do away the past, she might hope to be forgiven.
But it should be so no more.
In the warmth of true contrition, she would call upon her the very next
morning, and it should be the beginning, on her side, of a regular,
equal, kindly intercourse.
She had no objection.
Her eyes were towards Donwell as she walked, but she saw him not.

“The ladies were all at home.” She had never rejoiced at the sound
before, nor ever before entered the passage, nor walked up the stairs,
with any wish of giving pleasure, but in conferring obligation, or of
deriving it, except in subsequent ridicule.
There was a bustle on her approach; a good deal of moving and talking.
She heard Miss Bates’s voice, something was to be done in a hurry; the
maid looked frightened and awkward; hoped she would be pleased to wait
a moment, and then ushered her in too soon.
The aunt and niece seemed
both escaping into the adjoining room.
Bates, civil and humble as usual, looked as if she did
not quite understand what was going on.

“I am afraid Jane is not very well,” said she, “but I do not know; they
_tell_ me she is well.
I dare say my daughter will be here presently,
Miss Woodhouse.
I wish Hetty had not gone.
But Miss Bates soon came—“Very happy and
obliged”—but Emma’s conscience told her that there was not the same
cheerful volubility as before—less ease of look and manner.
The touch seemed immediate.

“Ah!
Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are!—I suppose you have heard—and are
come to give us joy.
This does not seem much like joy, indeed, in
me—(twinkling away a tear or two)—but it will be very trying for us to
part with her, after having had her so long, and she has a dreadful
headache just now, writing all the morning:—such long letters, you
know, to be written to Colonel Campbell, and Mrs.
When one is in great pain, you know one
cannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve.
You will excuse her not coming
to you—she is not able—she is gone into her own room—I want her to lie
down upon the bed. ‘My dear,’ said I, ‘I shall say you are laid down
upon the bed:’ but, however, she is not; she is walking about the room.
She will be extremely sorry to miss seeing you, Miss Woodhouse,
but your kindness will excuse her.
You were kept waiting at the door—I
was quite ashamed—but somehow there was a little bustle—for it so
happened that we had not heard the knock, and till you were on the
stairs, we did not know any body was coming. ‘It is only Mrs.
Cole,’
said I, ‘depend upon it.
Nobody else would come so early.’ ‘Well,’ said
she, ‘it must be borne some time or other, and it may as well be now.’
But then Patty came in, and said it was you. ‘Oh!’ said I, ‘it is Miss
Woodhouse: I am sure you will like to see her.’—‘I can see nobody,’
said she; and up she got, and would go away; and that was what made us
keep you waiting—and extremely sorry and ashamed we were. ‘If you must
go, my dear,’ said I, ‘you must, and I will say you are laid down upon
the bed.’”

Emma was most sincerely interested.
Her heart had been long growing
kinder towards Jane; and this picture of her present sufferings acted
as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion, and left her nothing
but pity; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle
sensations of the past, obliged her to admit that Jane might very
naturally resolve on seeing Mrs.
Cole or any other steady friend, when
she might not bear to see herself.
She spoke as she felt, with earnest
regret and solicitude—sincerely wishing that the circumstances which
she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually determined on, might
be as much for Miss Fairfax’s advantage and comfort as possible. “It
must be a severe trial to them all.
Impossible that any
situation could be more replete with comfort; if we except, perhaps,
Mrs.
Smallridge is
intimate with both, and in the very same neighbourhood:—lives only four
miles from Maple Grove.
Elton, I suppose, has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes—”

“Yes, our good Mrs.
The most indefatigable, true friend.
She would not let Jane say, ‘No;’ for when
Jane first heard of it, (it was the day before yesterday, the very
morning we were at Donwell,) when Jane first heard of it, she was quite
decided against accepting the offer, and for the reasons you mention;
exactly as you say, she had made up her mind to close with nothing till
Colonel Campbell’s return, and nothing should induce her to enter into
any engagement at present—and so she told Mrs.
Elton over and over
again—and I am sure I had no more idea that she would change her
mind!—but that good Mrs.
Elton, whose judgment never fails her, saw
farther than I did.
I had not
the least idea!—Jane took Mrs.
Elton aside, and told her at once, that
upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs.
Elton would have us come.
It was settled so, upon
the hill, while we were walking about with Mr.
Knightley. ‘You _must_
_all_ spend your evening with us,’ said she—‘I positively must have you
_all_ come.’”

“Mr.
Knightley was there too, was he?”

“No, not Mr.
Such kind friends, you know, Miss
Woodhouse, one must always find agreeable, though every body seemed
rather fagged after the morning’s party.
Even pleasure, you know, is
fatiguing—and I cannot say that any of them seemed very much to have
enjoyed it.
However, _I_ shall always think it a very pleasant party,
and feel extremely obliged to the kind friends who included me in it.”

“Miss Fairfax, I suppose, though you were not aware of it, had been
making up her mind the whole day?”

“I dare say she had.”

“Whenever the time may come, it must be unwelcome to her and all her
friends—but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation that is
possible—I mean, as to the character and manners of the family.”

“Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse.
Yes, indeed, there is every thing in
the world that can make her happy in it.
Except the Sucklings and
Bragges, there is not such another nursery establishment, so liberal
and elegant, in all Mrs.
Elton’s acquaintance.
Jane will be treated with
such regard and kindness!—It will be nothing but pleasure, a life of
pleasure.—And her salary!—I really cannot venture to name her salary to
you, Miss Woodhouse.
Even you, used as you are to great sums, would
hardly believe that so much could be given to a young person like
Jane.”

“Ah! madam,” cried Emma, “if other children are at all like what I
remember to have been myself, I should think five times the amount of
what I have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasions, dearly
earned.”

“You are so noble in your ideas!”

“And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you?”

“Very soon, very soon, indeed; that’s the worst of it.
Within a
fortnight.
Mrs.
My poor mother does not
know how to bear it.
So then, I try to put it out of her thoughts, and
say, Come ma’am, do not let us think about it any more.”

“Her friends must all be sorry to lose her; and will not Colonel and
Mrs.
Campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself before
their return?”

“Yes; Jane says she is sure they will; but yet, this is such a
situation as she cannot feel herself justified in declining.
Elton at the same moment came congratulating me
upon it!
Mr.
Poor old
John, I have a great regard for him; he was clerk to my poor father
twenty-seven years; and now, poor old man, he is bed-ridden, and very
poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints—I must go and see him
to-day; and so will Jane, I am sure, if she gets out at all.
Elton about relief from the parish; he
is very well to do himself, you know, being head man at the Crown,
ostler, and every thing of that sort, but still he cannot keep his
father without some help; and so, when Mr.
It was after tea that Jane
spoke to Mrs.
Churchill, and only wishing him not to delay coming
back beyond the next morning early; but that Mr.
Frank Churchill having
resolved to go home directly, without waiting at all, and his horse
seeming to have got a cold, Tom had been sent off immediately for the
Crown chaise, and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by, the boy
going a good pace, and driving very steady.
There was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest, and it
caught Emma’s attention only as it united with the subject which
already engaged her mind.
The contrast between Mrs.
What is to become
of that?—Very true.
Poor dear Jane was talking of it just now.—‘You
must go,’ said she. ‘You and I must part.
I shall talk about it to him; he will settle for
me; he will help me out of all my difficulties.’—And to this day, I do
believe, she knows not whether it was his present or his daughter’s.”

Now Emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte; and the remembrance of
all her former fanciful and unfair conjectures was so little pleasing,
that she soon allowed herself to believe her visit had been long
enough; and, with a repetition of every thing that she could venture to
say of the good wishes which she really felt, took leave.
CHAPTER IX


Emma’s pensive meditations, as she walked home, were not interrupted;
but on entering the parlour, she found those who must rouse her.
Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her absence, and were sitting
with her father.—Mr.
Knightley immediately got up, and in a manner
decidedly graver than usual, said,

“I would not go away without seeing you, but I have no time to spare,
and therefore must now be gone directly.
Have you any thing to send or say,
besides the ‘love,’ which nobody carries?”

“Nothing at all.
But is not this a sudden scheme?”

“Yes—rather—I have been thinking of it some little time.”

Emma was sure he had not forgiven her; he looked unlike himself.
Time,
however, she thought, would tell him that they ought to be friends
again.
She is always so
attentive to them!”

Emma’s colour was heightened by this unjust praise; and with a smile,
and shake of the head, which spoke much, she looked at Mr.
Knightley.—It seemed as if there were an instantaneous impression in
her favour, as if his eyes received the truth from hers, and all that
had passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured.—
He looked at her with a glow of regard.
Elton is very good-natured and agreeable, and I dare say
her acquaintance are just what they ought to be.
I hope it is a dry
situation, and that her health will be taken good care of.
An express arrived at Randalls to announce the
death of Mrs.
Churchill!
Though her nephew had had no particular reason
to hasten back on her account, she had not lived above six-and-thirty
hours after his return.
A sudden seizure of a different nature from any
thing foreboded by her general state, had carried her off after a short
struggle.
The great Mrs.
It was felt as such things must be felt.
Mrs.
Churchill, after being disliked at least twenty-five years, was
now spoken of with compassionate allowances.
In one point she was fully
justified.
She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill.
The
event acquitted her of all the fancifulness, and all the selfishness of
imaginary complaints.

“Poor Mrs.
Churchill! no doubt she had been suffering a great deal:
more than any body had ever supposed—and continual pain would try the
temper.
Churchill do without her?
Churchill’s loss would be
dreadful indeed.
Mr.
Weston shook his head, and looked solemn, and said, “Ah! poor woman,
who would have thought it!” and resolved, that his mourning should be
as handsome as possible; and his wife sat sighing and moralising over
her broad hems with a commiseration and good sense, true and steady.
How it would affect Frank was among the earliest thoughts of both.
It
was also a very early speculation with Emma.
All that remained to be wished was, that the
nephew should form the attachment, as, with all her goodwill in the
cause, Emma could feel no certainty of its being already formed.
What ever she might feel of brighter hope, she betrayed
nothing.
Emma was gratified, to observe such a proof in her of
strengthened character, and refrained from any allusion that might
endanger its maintenance.
They spoke, therefore, of Mrs.
Mr.
Churchill
was better than could be expected; and their first removal, on the
departure of the funeral for Yorkshire, was to be to the house of a
very old friend in Windsor, to whom Mr.
At present, there was nothing to be done for
Harriet; good wishes for the future were all that could yet be possible
on Emma’s side.
She had scarcely
a stronger regret than for her past coldness; and the person, whom she
had been so many months neglecting, was now the very one on whom she
would have lavished every distinction of regard or sympathy.
She wanted
to be of use to her; wanted to shew a value for her society, and
testify respect and consideration.
A note was written to urge it.
Perry was uneasy about her.
Her spirits seemed overcome.
Her
present home, he could not but observe, was unfavourable to a nervous
disorder:—confined always to one room;—he could have wished it
otherwise—and her good aunt, though his very old friend, he must
acknowledge to be not the best companion for an invalid of that
description.
He very much feared that Miss Fairfax derived
more evil than good from them.
Emma listened with the warmest concern;
grieved for her more and more, and looked around eager to discover some
way of being useful.
Perry’s decided
opinion, in favour of such exercise for his patient.
Cole had made such a point—and Mrs.
Coles, who would force themselves anywhere; neither could
she feel any right of preference herself—she submitted, therefore, and
only questioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece’s appetite and diet,
which she longed to be able to assist.
Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper directly, to an
examination of her stores; and some arrowroot of very superior quality
was speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note.
CHAPTER X


One morning, about ten days after Mrs.
Mrs.
Weston wants to see you.
It is impossible to refuse what
you ask in such a way.
But what can be the matter?—Is she really not
ill?”

“Depend upon me—but ask no more questions.
Weston were soon
out of the house together and on their way at a quick pace for
Randalls.

“Now,”—said Emma, when they were fairly beyond the sweep gates,—“now
Mr.
I promised my wife to
leave it all to her.
Do not
be impatient, Emma; it will all come out too soon.”

“Break it to me,” cried Emma, standing still with terror.—“Good
God!—Mr.
I know it has.
Tell me, I charge you tell me this moment what
it is.”

“No, indeed you are mistaken.”—

“Mr.
Which of them is it?—I charge you
by all that is sacred, not to attempt concealment.”

“Upon my word, Emma.”—

“Your word!—why not your honour!—why not say upon your honour, that it
has nothing to do with any of them?
Good Heavens!—What can be to be
_broke_ to me, that does not relate to one of that family?”

“Upon my honour,” said he very seriously, “it does not.
She
asked no more questions therefore, merely employed her own fancy, and
that soon pointed out to her the probability of its being some money
concern—something just come to light, of a disagreeable nature in the
circumstances of the family,—something which the late event at Richmond
had brought forward.
Her fancy was very active.
Weston in keeping his secret,
than with any other view.

“I do not know.—One of the Otways.—Not Frank;—it is not Frank, I assure
you.
You will not see him.
He is half way to Windsor by this time.”

“Has your son been with you, then?”

“Oh! yes—did not you know?—Well, well, never mind.”

For a moment he was silent; and then added, in a tone much more guarded
and demure,

“Yes, Frank came over this morning, just to ask us how we did.”

They hurried on, and were speedily at Randalls.—“Well, my dear,” said
he, as they entered the room—“I have brought her, and now I hope you
will soon be better.
I shall not be far off, if you want me.”—And Emma distinctly
heard him add, in a lower tone, before he quitted the room,—“I have
been as good as my word.
She has not the least idea.”

Mrs.
Something of a very unpleasant nature, I
find, has occurred;—do let me know directly what it is.
We both abhor suspense.
Do
not let mine continue longer.
Weston in a trembling voice.
“Cannot you, my dear Emma—cannot you form a guess as to what you are to
hear?”

“So far as that it relates to Mr.
It is
impossible to express our surprize.
Weston; “an
engagement—a positive engagement.—What will you say, Emma—what will any
body say, when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax are
engaged;—nay, that they have been long engaged!”

Emma even jumped with surprize;—and, horror-struck, exclaimed,

“Jane Fairfax!—Good God!
You do not mean it?”

“You may well be amazed,” returned Mrs.
Weston, still averting her
eyes, and talking on with eagerness, that Emma might have time to
recover— “You may well be amazed.
But it is even so.
What!—engaged to her all the winter—before either of
them came to Highbury?”

“Engaged since October,—secretly engaged.—It has hurt me, Emma, very
much.
It has hurt his father equally. _Some_ _part_ of his conduct we
cannot excuse.”

Emma pondered a moment, and then replied, “I will not pretend _not_ to
understand you; and to give you all the relief in my power, be assured
that no such effect has followed his attentions to me, as you are
apprehensive of.”

Mrs.
Fortunately, however, it did cease.
I have really for some time past,
for at least these three months, cared nothing about him.
Weston.
This is the simple truth.”

Mrs.
Weston kissed her with tears of joy; and when she could find
utterance, assured her, that this protestation had done her more good
than any thing else in the world could do.

“Mr.
Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself,” said she. “On
this point we have been wretched.
What right had he to
come among us with affection and faith engaged, and with manners so
_very_ disengaged?
Composure with a witness! to
look on, while repeated attentions were offering to another woman,
before her face, and not resent it.—That is a degree of placidity,
which I can neither comprehend nor respect.”

“There were misunderstandings between them, Emma; he said so expressly.
He had not time to enter into much explanation.
The present crisis, indeed, seemed
to be brought on by them; and those misunderstandings might very
possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct.”

“Impropriety!
Mrs.
Weston—it is too calm a censure.
Much, much
beyond impropriety!—It has sunk him, I cannot say how it has sunk him
in my opinion.
So unlike what a man should be!—None of that upright
integrity, that strict adherence to truth and principle, that disdain
of trick and littleness, which a man should display in every
transaction of his life.”

“Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for though he has been wrong
in this instance, I have known him long enough to answer for his having
many, very many, good qualities; and—”

“Good God!” cried Emma, not attending to her.—“Mrs.
Jane actually on the point of going as governess!
What could he mean by
such horrible indelicacy?
On this article I can fully acquit
him.
It was a private resolution of hers, not communicated to him—or at
least not communicated in a way to carry conviction.—Till yesterday, I
know he said he was in the dark as to her plans.
They burst on him, I
do not know how, but by some letter or message—and it was the discovery
of what she was doing, of this very project of hers, which determined
him to come forward at once, own it all to his uncle, throw himself on
his kindness, and, in short, put an end to the miserable state of
concealment that had been carrying on so long.”

Emma began to listen better.

“I am to hear from him soon,” continued Mrs.
Weston. “He told me at
parting, that he should soon write; and he spoke in a manner which
seemed to promise me many particulars that could not be given now.
It may bring many extenuations.
It
may make many things intelligible and excusable which now are not to be
understood.
Don’t let us be severe, don’t let us be in a hurry to
condemn him.
Let us have patience.
I must love him; and now that I am
satisfied on one point, the one material point, I am sincerely anxious
for its all turning out well, and ready to hope that it may.
Churchill lived, I suppose there could not have
been a hope, a chance, a possibility;—but scarcely are her remains at
rest in the family vault, than her husband is persuaded to act exactly
opposite to what she would have required.
He stopped at Highbury, at the Bates’s, I fancy, some time—and
then came on hither; but was in such a hurry to get back to his uncle,
to whom he is just now more necessary than ever, that, as I tell you,
he could stay with us but a quarter of an hour.—He was very much
agitated—very much, indeed—to a degree that made him appear quite a
different creature from any thing I had ever seen him before.—In
addition to all the rest, there had been the shock of finding her so
very unwell, which he had had no previous suspicion of—and there was
every appearance of his having been feeling a great deal.”

“And do you really believe the affair to have been carrying on with
such perfect secresy?—The Campbells, the Dixons, did none of them know
of the engagement?”

Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush.

“None; not one.
Let us make the
best of it—and, indeed, almost every thing may be fairly said in her
favour.
It is not a connexion to gratify; but if Mr.
And
how much may be said in her situation for even that error!”

“Much, indeed!” cried Emma feelingly. “If a woman can ever be excused
for thinking only of herself, it is in a situation like Jane
Fairfax’s.—Of such, one may almost say, that ‘the world is not their’s,
nor the world’s law.’”

She met Mr.
I thought you had lost half
your property, at least.
His air and voice recovered their usual briskness: he
shook her heartily and gratefully by the hand, and entered on the
subject in a manner to prove, that he now only wanted time and
persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing.
His companions
suggested only what could palliate imprudence, or smooth objections;
and by the time they had talked it all over together, and he had talked
it all over again with Emma, in their walk back to Hartfield, he was
become perfectly reconciled, and not far from thinking it the very best
thing that Frank could possibly have done.
CHAPTER XI


“Harriet, poor Harriet!”—Those were the words; in them lay the
tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of, and which constituted
the real misery of the business to her.
Frank Churchill had behaved
very ill by herself—very ill in many ways,—but it was not so much _his_
behaviour as her _own_, which made her so angry with him.
It was the
scrape which he had drawn her into on Harriet’s account, that gave the
deepest hue to his offence.—Poor Harriet! to be a second time the dupe
of her misconceptions and flattery.
Knightley had spoken
prophetically, when he once said, “Emma, you have been no friend to
Harriet Smith.”—She was afraid she had done her nothing but
disservice.—It was true that she had not to charge herself, in this
instance as in the former, with being the sole and original author of
the mischief; with having suggested such feelings as might otherwise
never have entered Harriet’s imagination; for Harriet had acknowledged
her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill before she had ever
given her a hint on the subject; but she felt completely guilty of
having encouraged what she might have repressed.
Harriet would be anxiety enough; she need no
longer be unhappy about Jane, whose troubles and whose ill-health
having, of course, the same origin, must be equally under cure.—Her
days of insignificance and evil were over.—She would soon be well, and
happy, and prosperous.—Emma could now imagine why her own attentions
had been slighted.
She
understood it all; and as far as her mind could disengage itself from
the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings, she acknowledged that
Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her
desert.
Considering the very superior claims of the object, it ought; and
judging by its apparently stronger effect on Harriet’s mind, producing
reserve and self-command, it would.—She must communicate the painful
truth, however, and as soon as possible.
An injunction of secresy had
been among Mr.
Mr.
Churchill had made a point of
it, as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost; and
every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum.”—Emma had
promised; but still Harriet must be excepted.
Weston felt when _she_ was approaching Randalls.
Could the
event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance!—But of that,
unfortunately, there could be no chance.

“Well, Miss Woodhouse!” cried Harriet, coming eagerly into the room—“is
not this the oddest news that ever was?”

“What news do you mean?” replied Emma, unable to guess, by look or
voice, whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint.

“About Jane Fairfax.
Oh!—you
need not be afraid of owning it to me, for Mr.
Weston has told me
himself.
He told me it was to be a great secret;
and, therefore, I should not think of mentioning it to any body but
you, but he said you knew it.”

“What did Mr.
Weston tell you?”—said Emma, still perplexed.

“Oh! he told me all about it; that Jane Fairfax and Mr.
How very odd!”

It was, indeed, so odd; Harriet’s behaviour was so extremely odd, that
Emma did not know how to understand it.
She seemed to propose shewing no agitation, or
disappointment, or peculiar concern in the discovery.
Emma looked at
her, quite unable to speak.

“Had you any idea,” cried Harriet, “of his being in love with her?—You,
perhaps, might.—You (blushing as she spoke) who can see into every
body’s heart; but nobody else—”

“Upon my word,” said Emma, “I begin to doubt my having any such talent.
Can you seriously ask me, Harriet, whether I imagined him attached to
another woman at the very time that I was—tacitly, if not
openly—encouraging you to give way to your own feelings?—I never had
the slightest suspicion, till within the last hour, of Mr.
Frank Churchill.”

“I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject,” replied
Emma, smiling; “but you do not mean to deny that there was a time—and
not very distant either—when you gave me reason to understand that you
did care about him?”

“Him!—never, never.
Dear Miss Woodhouse, how could you so mistake me?”
turning away distressed.

“Harriet!” cried Emma, after a moment’s pause—“What do you mean?—Good
Heaven! what do you mean?—Mistake you!—Am I to suppose then?—”

She could not speak another word.—Her voice was lost; and she sat down,
waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer.
Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face turned from
her, did not immediately say any thing; and when she did speak, it was
in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma’s.

“I should not have thought it possible,” she began, “that you could
have misunderstood me!
I know we agreed never to name him—but
considering how infinitely superior he is to every body else, I should
not have thought it possible that I could be supposed to mean any other
person.
Mr.
I hope I have a better taste than
to think of Mr.
At first, if you had not
told me that more wonderful things had happened; that there had been
matches of greater disparity (those were your very words);—I should not
have dared to give way to—I should not have thought it possible—But if
_you_, who had been always acquainted with him—”

“Harriet!” cried Emma, collecting herself resolutely—“Let us understand
each other now, without the possibility of farther mistake.
Are you
speaking of—Mr.
I could
almost assert that you had _named_ Mr.
Miss Woodhouse, how you do forget!”

“My dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the substance of what I said on
the occasion.
I told you that I did not wonder at your attachment; that
considering the service he had rendered you, it was extremely
natural:—and you agreed to it, expressing yourself very warmly as to
your sense of that service, and mentioning even what your sensations
had been in seeing him come forward to your rescue.—The impression of
it is strong on my memory.”

“Oh, dear,” cried Harriet, “now I recollect what you mean; but I was
thinking of something very different at the time.
It was not the
gipsies—it was not Mr.
Knightley’s coming and asking me to dance, when Mr.
At
least, however, I cannot be worse off than I should have been, if the
other had been the person; and now—it _is_ possible—”

She paused a few moments.
Emma could not speak.

“I do not wonder, Miss Woodhouse,” she resumed, “that you should feel a
great difference between the two, as to me or as to any body.
But
I hope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing—that if—strange as it may
appear—.
But you know they were your own words, that _more_ wonderful
things had happened, matches of _greater_ disparity had taken place
than between Mr.
Frank Churchill and me; and, therefore, it seems as if
such a thing even as this, may have occurred before—and if I should be
so fortunate, beyond expression, as to—if Mr.
Emma turned round to look
at her in consternation, and hastily said,

“Have you any idea of Mr.
Knightley’s returning your affection?”

“Yes,” replied Harriet modestly, but not fearfully—“I must say that I
have.”

Emma’s eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat silently meditating,
in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes.
A few minutes were sufficient
for making her acquainted with her own heart.
Why was it so much worse that Harriet
should be in love with Mr.
Her own conduct, as well as her own heart, was before her in the same
few minutes.
She saw it all with a clearness which had never blessed
her before.
What blindness, what madness, had led her on!
It struck
her with dreadful force, and she was ready to give it every bad name in
the world.
Knightley and themselves.
Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie, was yet very glad
to be called from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge,
and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation, to
give the history of her hopes with great, though trembling
delight.—Emma’s tremblings as she asked, and as she listened, were
better concealed than Harriet’s, but they were not less.
Knightley’s most improved opinion of
Harriet.
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since
those two decisive dances.—Emma knew that he had, on that occasion,
found her much superior to his expectation.
From that evening, or at
least from the time of Miss Woodhouse’s encouraging her to think of
him, Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much more
than he had been used to do, and of his having indeed quite a different
manner towards her; a manner of kindness and sweetness!—Latterly she
had been more and more aware of it.
She had often observed the change, to
almost the same extent.—Harriet repeated expressions of approbation and
praise from him—and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with
what she had known of his opinion of Harriet.
On the subject of the first of the two circumstances, she did, after a
little reflection, venture the following question. “Might he not?—Is
not it possible, that when enquiring, as you thought, into the state of
your affections, he might be alluding to Mr.
Martin—he might have Mr.
No indeed!—There was not a hint of Mr.
I hope I
know better now, than to care for Mr.
But now I seem to feel that I may
deserve him; and that if he does chuse me, it will not be any thing so
very wonderful.”

The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech, the many bitter
feelings, made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma’s side, to enable
her to say on reply,

“Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr.
Knightley is the
last man in the world, who would intentionally give any woman the idea
of his feeling for her more than he really does.”

Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so
satisfactory; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness, which
at that moment would have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her
father’s footsteps.
Woodhouse would be alarmed—she had better go;”—with most ready
encouragement from her friend, therefore, she passed off through
another door—and the moment she was gone, this was the spontaneous
burst of Emma’s feelings: “Oh God! that I had never seen her!”

The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough for her
thoughts.—She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had
rushed on her within the last few hours.
Every moment had brought a
fresh surprize; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to
her.—How to understand it all!
To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, was the first
endeavour.
To that point went every leisure moment which her father’s
claims on her allowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of mind.
How long had Mr.
Knightley been so dear to her, as every feeling
declared him now to be?
Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when his regard for her had
not been infinitely the most dear.
This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection.
Knightley.—Every other part of her mind
was disgusting.
With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of
every body’s feelings; with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange
every body’s destiny.
She was proved to have been universally mistaken;
and she had not quite done nothing—for she had done mischief.
Mr.
Knightley and Harriet Smith!—It was a union to distance every
wonder of the kind.—The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax
became commonplace, threadbare, stale in the comparison, exciting no
surprize, presenting no disparity, affording nothing to be said or
thought.—Mr.
Knightley and Harriet Smith!—Such an elevation on her
side!
Such a debasement on his!
Oh! had she never brought Harriet forward!
Knightley!—How she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of
such a man till actually assured of it!—But Harriet was less humble,
had fewer scruples than formerly.—Her inferiority, whether of mind or
situation, seemed little felt.—She had seemed more sensible of Mr.
Elton’s being to stoop in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr.
Knightley’s.—Alas! was not that her own doing too?
CHAPTER XII


Till now that she was threatened with its loss, Emma had never known
how much of her happiness depended on being _first_ with Mr.
Knightley,
first in interest and affection.—Satisfied that it was so, and feeling
it her due, she had enjoyed it without reflection; and only in the
dread of being supplanted, found how inexpressibly important it had
been.—Long, very long, she felt she had been first; for, having no
female connexions of his own, there had been only Isabella whose claims
could be compared with hers, and she had always known exactly how far
he loved and esteemed Isabella.
She had herself been first with him for
many years past.
In spite of all her faults, she knew
she was dear to him; might she not say, very dear?—When the suggestions
of hope, however, which must follow here, presented themselves, she
could not presume to indulge them.
She could not flatter herself with any
idea of blindness in his attachment to _her_.
She had received a very
recent proof of its impartiality.—How shocked had he been by her
behaviour to Miss Bates!
It
would be incompatible with what she owed to her father, and with what
she felt for him.
It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be disappointed; and she
hoped, that when able to see them together again, she might at least be
able to ascertain what the chances for it were.—She should see them
henceforward with the closest observance; and wretchedly as she had
hitherto misunderstood even those she was watching, she did not know
how to admit that she could be blinded here.—He was expected back every
day.
Bates’s parlour, with all the
encumbrance of awkward feelings, could have afforded.
A little curiosity Emma had; and she made the most of it while her
friend related.
Mrs.
She had
hardly been able to speak a word, and every look and action had shewn
how deeply she was suffering from consciousness.
Miss
Fairfax’s recent illness had offered a fair plea for Mrs.
Weston had, by gentle encouragement, overcome so much of her
embarrassment, as to bring her to converse on the important subject.
Weston was convinced that such conversation must be the greatest relief
to her companion, pent up within her own mind as every thing had so
long been, and was very much pleased with all that she had said on the
subject.

“On the misery of what she had suffered, during the concealment of so
many months,” continued Mrs.
Weston, “she was energetic.
I never can be blameless.
She was sensible that you had never
received any proper acknowledgment from herself.”

“If I did not know her to be happy now,” said Emma, seriously, “which,
in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous conscience, she
must be, I could not bear these thanks;—for, oh!
Weston, if there
were an account drawn up of the evil and the good I have done Miss
Fairfax!—Well (checking herself, and trying to be more lively), this is
all to be forgotten.
They shew her to the greatest advantage.
I am sure she is
very good—I hope she will be very happy.
She talked with
a great deal of reason, and at least equal affection—but she had too
much to urge for Emma’s attention; it was soon gone to Brunswick Square
or to Donwell; she forgot to attempt to listen; and when Mrs.
Weston
ended with, “We have not yet had the letter we are so anxious for, you
know, but I hope it will soon come,” she was obliged to pause before
she answered, and at last obliged to answer at random, before she could
at all recollect what letter it was which they were so anxious for.

“Are you well, my Emma?” was Mrs.
Weston’s parting question.

“Oh! perfectly.
I am always well, you know.
Had she followed Mr.
She must have been a
perpetual enemy.
They never could have been all three together, without
her having stabbed Jane Fairfax’s peace in a thousand instances; and on
Box Hill, perhaps, it had been the agony of a mind that would bear no
more.
A cold stormy rain set in,
and nothing of July appeared but in the trees and shrubs, which the
wind was despoiling, and the length of the day, which only made such
cruel sights the longer visible.
Weston’s
wedding-day; but Mr.
Knightley had walked in then, soon after tea, and
dissipated every melancholy fancy.
The picture which she had then drawn of the privations of the
approaching winter, had proved erroneous; no friends had deserted them,
no pleasures had been lost.—But her present forebodings she feared
would experience no similar contradiction.
The prospect before her now,
was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled—that
might not be even partially brightened.
If all took place that might
take place among the circle of her friends, Hartfield must be
comparatively deserted; and she left to cheer her father with the
spirits only of ruined happiness.
They
should lose her; and, probably, in great measure, her husband
also.—Frank Churchill would return among them no more; and Miss
Fairfax, it was reasonable to suppose, would soon cease to belong to
Highbury.
Mr.
Knightley to be
no longer coming there for his evening comfort!—No longer walking in at
all hours, as if ever willing to change his own home for their’s!—How
was it to be endured?
With all the eagerness which such a transition gives,
Emma resolved to be out of doors as soon as possible.
She longed for
the serenity they might gradually introduce; and on Mr.
Perry’s coming
in soon after dinner, with a disengaged hour to give her father, she
lost no time in hurrying into the shrubbery.—There, with spirits
freshened, and thoughts a little relieved, she had taken a few turns,
when she saw Mr.
In half a
minute they were together.
She asked after their mutual friends; they
were all well.—When had he left them?—Only that morning.
He must have
had a wet ride.—Yes.—He meant to walk with her, she found. “He had just
looked into the dining-room, and as he was not wanted there, preferred
being out of doors.”—She thought he neither looked nor spoke
cheerfully; and the first possible cause for it, suggested by her
fears, was, that he had perhaps been communicating his plans to his
brother, and was pained by the manner in which they had been received.
They walked together.
He was silent.
And this belief produced another dread.
Perhaps he wanted to
speak to her, of his attachment to Harriet; he might be watching for
encouragement to begin.—She did not, could not, feel equal to lead the
way to any such subject.
She
considered—resolved—and, trying to smile, began—

“You have some news to hear, now you are come back, that will rather
surprize you.”

“Have I?” said he quietly, and looking at her; “of what nature?”

“Oh! the best nature in the world—a wedding.”

After waiting a moment, as if to be sure she intended to say no more,
he replied,

“If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, I have heard that
already.”

“How is it possible?” cried Emma, turning her glowing cheeks towards
him; for, while she spoke, it occurred to her that he might have called
at Mrs.
Weston this morning, and
at the end of them he gave me a brief account of what had happened.”

Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say, with a little more
composure,

“_You_ probably have been less surprized than any of us, for you have
had your suspicions.—I have not forgotten that you once tried to give
me a caution.—I wish I had attended to it—but—(with a sinking voice and
a heavy sigh) I seem to have been doomed to blindness.”

For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was unsuspicious of
having excited any particular interest, till she found her arm drawn
within his, and pressed against his heart, and heard him thus saying,
in a tone of great sensibility, speaking low,

“Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound.—Your own excellent
sense—your exertions for your father’s sake—I know you will not allow
yourself—.” Her arm was pressed again, as he added, in a more broken
and subdued accent, “The feelings of the warmest
friendship—Indignation—Abominable scoundrel!”—And in a louder, steadier
tone, he concluded with, “He will soon be gone.
Knightley,” said Emma, trying to be lively, but really confused—“I
am in a very extraordinary situation.
I cannot let you continue in your
error; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression, I
have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have been
at all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might be
natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.—But I
never have.”

He listened in perfect silence.
She wished him to speak, but he would
not.
She supposed she must say more before she were entitled to his
clemency; but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself
in his opinion.
She went on, however.

“I have very little to say for my own conduct.—I was tempted by his
attentions, and allowed myself to appear pleased.—An old story,
probably—a common case—and no more than has happened to hundreds of my
sex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets up
as I do for Understanding.
Latterly, however—for some
time, indeed—I have had no idea of their meaning any thing.—I thought
them a habit, a trick, nothing that called for seriousness on my side.
And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour.
He
never wished to attach me.
It was merely a blind to conceal his real
situation with another.—It was his object to blind all about him; and
no one, I am sure, could be more effectually blinded than myself—except
that I was _not_ blinded—that it was my good fortune—that, in short, I
was somehow or other safe from him.”

She had hoped for an answer here—for a few words to say that her
conduct was at least intelligible; but he was silent; and, as far as
she could judge, deep in thought.
My acquaintance with him has
been but trifling.—And even if I have not underrated him hitherto, he
may yet turn out well.—With such a woman he has a chance.—I have no
motive for wishing him ill—and for her sake, whose happiness will be
involved in his good character and conduct, I shall certainly wish him
well.”

“I have no doubt of their being happy together,” said Emma; “I believe
them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached.”

“He is a most fortunate man!” returned Mr.
Knightley, with energy. “So
early in life—at three-and-twenty—a period when, if a man chuses a
wife, he generally chuses ill.
Every thing turns out for his good.—He meets with a young
woman at a watering-place, gains her affection, cannot even weary her
by negligent treatment—and had he and all his family sought round the
world for a perfect wife for him, they could not have found her
superior.—His aunt is in the way.—His aunt dies.—He has only to
speak.—His friends are eager to promote his happiness.—He had used
every body ill—and they are all delighted to forgive him.—He is a
fortunate man indeed!”

“You speak as if you envied him.”

“And I do envy him, Emma.
In one respect he is the object of my envy.”

Emma could say no more.
She made her plan; she would speak of something totally
different—the children in Brunswick Square; and she only waited for
breath to begin, when Mr.
Emma could not bear to give him pain.
Mr.
Knightley, and, I am afraid, gave you
pain.—But if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend, or to
ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation—as a
friend, indeed, you may command me.—I will hear whatever you like.
I
will tell you exactly what I think.”

“As a friend!”—repeated Mr.
But you know what I am.—You hear nothing but truth from me.—I
have blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne it as no other
woman in England would have borne it.—Bear with the truths I would tell
you now, dearest Emma, as well as you have borne with them.
The manner,
perhaps, may have as little to recommend them.
At present, I
ask only to hear, once to hear your voice.”

While he spoke, Emma’s mind was most busy, and, with all the wonderful
velocity of thought, had been able—and yet without losing a word—to
catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole; to see that
Harriet’s hopes had been entirely groundless, a mistake, a delusion, as
complete a delusion as any of her own—that Harriet was nothing; that
she was every thing herself; that what she had been saying relative to
Harriet had been all taken as the language of her own feelings; and
that her agitation, her doubts, her reluctance, her discouragement, had
been all received as discouragement from herself.—And not only was
there time for these convictions, with all their glow of attendant
happiness; there was time also to rejoice that Harriet’s secret had not
escaped her, and to resolve that it need not, and should not.—It was
all the service she could now render her poor friend; for as to any of
that heroism of sentiment which might have prompted her to entreat him
to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet, as infinitely the
most worthy of the two—or even the more simple sublimity of resolving
to refuse him at once and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive,
because he could not marry them both, Emma had it not.
She felt for
Harriet, with pain and with contrition; but no flight of generosity run
mad, opposing all that could be probable or reasonable, entered her
brain.
Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to any human
disclosure; seldom can it happen that something is not a little
disguised, or a little mistaken; but where, as in this case, though the
conduct is mistaken, the feelings are not, it may not be very
material.—Mr.
The delightful assurance of her total indifference towards Frank
Churchill, of her having a heart completely disengaged from him, had
given birth to the hope, that, in time, he might gain her affection
himself;—but it had been no present hope—he had only, in the momentary
conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspired to be told that she did
not forbid his attempt to attach her.—The superior hopes which
gradually opened were so much the more enchanting.—The affection, which
he had been asking to be allowed to create, if he could, was already
his!—Within half an hour, he had passed from a thoroughly distressed
state of mind, to something so like perfect happiness, that it could
bear no other name.

_Her_ change was equal.—This one half-hour had given to each the same
precious certainty of being beloved, had cleared from each the same
degree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust.—On his side, there had been
a long-standing jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the expectation,
of Frank Churchill.—He had been in love with Emma, and jealous of Frank
Churchill, from about the same period, one sentiment having probably
enlightened him as to the other.
It was his jealousy of Frank Churchill
that had taken him from the country.—The Box Hill party had decided him
on going away.
There was too much
domestic happiness in his brother’s house; woman wore too amiable a
form in it; Isabella was too much like Emma—differing only in those
striking inferiorities, which always brought the other in brilliancy
before him, for much to have been done, even had his time been
longer.—He had stayed on, however, vigorously, day after day—till this
very morning’s post had conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax.—Then,
with the gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did not scruple to
feel, having never believed Frank Churchill to be at all deserving
Emma, was there so much fond solicitude, so much keen anxiety for her,
that he could stay no longer.
He had found her agitated and low.—Frank Churchill was a villain.— He
heard her declare that she had never loved him.
Poor Mr.
Her father—and Harriet.
With respect to her father, it
was a question soon answered.
Knightley
would ask; but a very short parley with her own heart produced the most
solemn resolution of never quitting her father.—She even wept over the
idea of it, as a sin of thought.
While he lived, it must be only an
engagement; but she flattered herself, that if divested of the danger
of drawing her away, it might become an increase of comfort to him.—How
to do her best by Harriet, was of more difficult decision;—how to spare
her from any unnecessary pain; how to make her any possible atonement;
how to appear least her enemy?—On these subjects, her perplexity and
distress were very great—and her mind had to pass again and again
through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever
surrounded it.—She could only resolve at last, that she would still
avoid a meeting with her, and communicate all that need be told by
letter; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her removed
just now for a time from Highbury, and—indulging in one scheme
more—nearly resolve, that it might be practicable to get an invitation
for her to Brunswick Square.—Isabella had been pleased with Harriet;
and a few weeks spent in London must give her some amusement.—She did
not think it in Harriet’s nature to escape being benefited by novelty
and variety, by the streets, the shops, and the children.—At any rate,
it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herself, from whom
every thing was due; a separation for the present; an averting of the
evil day, when they must all be together again.
He had not left her long, by no means long enough for her to have the
slightest inclination for thinking of any body else, when a letter was
brought her from Randalls—a very thick letter;—she guessed what it must
contain, and deprecated the necessity of reading it.—She was now in
perfect charity with Frank Churchill; she wanted no explanations, she
wanted only to have her thoughts to herself—and as for understanding
any thing he wrote, she was sure she was incapable of it.—It must be
waded through, however.
She opened the packet; it was too surely so;—a
note from Mrs.
Weston to herself, ushered in the letter from Frank to
Mrs.
I know what thorough justice you will do it, and have
scarcely a doubt of its happy effect.—I think we shall never materially
disagree about the writer again; but I will not delay you by a long
preface.—We are quite well.—This letter has been the cure of all the
little nervousness I have been feeling lately.—I did not quite like
your looks on Tuesday, but it was an ungenial morning; and though you
will never own being affected by weather, I think every body feels a
north-east wind.—I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of
Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning, but had the comfort of hearing
last night, by Mr.
Perry, that it had not made him ill.

“Yours ever,
“A.
W.”


[_To Mrs.
Weston_.]


Windsor—July.
MY DEAR MADAM,


“If I made myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will be expected;
but expected or not, I know it will be read with candour and
indulgence.—You are all goodness, and I believe there will be need of
even all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct.—But
I have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent.
My courage
rises while I write.
I have already met with such success in two applications for
pardon, that I may be in danger of thinking myself too sure of yours,
and of those among your friends who have had any ground of offence.—You
must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situation when
I first arrived at Randalls; you must consider me as having a secret
which was to be kept at all hazards.
This was the fact.
I dared not address her openly; my
difficulties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well known to
require definition; and I was fortunate enough to prevail, before we
parted at Weymouth, and to induce the most upright female mind in the
creation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement.—Had she refused, I
should have gone mad.—But you will be ready to say, what was your hope
in doing this?—What did you look forward to?—To any thing, every
thing—to time, chance, circumstance, slow effects, sudden bursts,
perseverance and weariness, health and sickness.
My behaviour,
during the very happy fortnight which I spent with you, did not, I
hope, lay me open to reprehension, excepting on one point.
And now I
come to the principal, the only important part of my conduct while
belonging to you, which excites my own anxiety, or requires very
solicitous explanation.
We seemed to understand each
other.
I cannot doubt it.
You will find, whenever the
subject becomes freed from its present restraints, that it did not take
her wholly by surprize.
I remember
her telling me at the ball, that I owed Mrs.
While you considered me as having sinned against Emma
Woodhouse, I could deserve nothing from either.
I want to have your opinion of her looks.
Perhaps it is paid already.
Let me hear from you without delay; I am
impatient for a thousand particulars.
When I think
of the kindness and favour I have met with, of her excellence and
patience, and my uncle’s generosity, I am mad with joy: but when I
recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her, and how little I deserve
to be forgiven, I am mad with anger.
My uncle has been too good for me to
encroach.—I must still add to this long letter.
I could not give any connected detail
yesterday; but the suddenness, and, in one light, the unseasonableness
with which the affair burst out, needs explanation; for though the
event of the 26th ult., as you will conclude, immediately opened to me
the happiest prospects, I should not have presumed on such early
measures, but from the very particular circumstances, which left me not
an hour to lose.
I behaved shamefully.
And here I can
admit, that my manners to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F., were
highly blameable. _She_ disapproved them, which ought to have been
enough.—My plea of concealing the truth she did not think
sufficient.—She was displeased; I thought unreasonably so: I thought
her, on a thousand occasions, unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious: I
thought her even cold.
I was late; I met her walking home by herself, and
wanted to walk with her, but she would not suffer it.
She absolutely
refused to allow me, which I then thought most unreasonable.
While I, to blind the world to our engagement, was
behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman,
was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made
every previous caution useless?—Had we been met walking together
between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must have been suspected.—I was
mad enough, however, to resent.—I doubted her affection.
I doubted it
more the next day on Box Hill; when, provoked by such conduct on my
side, such shameful, insolent neglect of her, and such apparent
devotion to Miss W., as it would have been impossible for any woman of
sense to endure, she spoke her resentment in a form of words perfectly
intelligible to me.—In short, my dear madam, it was a quarrel blameless
on her side, abominable on mine; and I returned the same evening to
Richmond, though I might have staid with you till the next morning,
merely because I would be as angry with her as possible.
Even then, I
was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time; but I was
the injured person, injured by her coldness, and I went away determined
that she should make the first advances.—I shall always congratulate
myself that you were not of the Box Hill party.
Its effect upon her appears in the immediate resolution it
produced: as soon as she found I was really gone from Randalls, she
closed with the offer of that officious Mrs.
I knew the name, the place, I knew all about it, and
instantly saw what she had been doing.
It was perfectly accordant with
that resolution of character which I knew her to possess; and the
secrecy she had maintained, as to any such design in her former letter,
was equally descriptive of its anxious delicacy.
For the world would
not she have seemed to threaten me.—Imagine the shock; imagine how,
till I had actually detected my own blunder, I raved at the blunders of
the post.—What was to be done?—One thing only.—I must speak to my
uncle.
A great deal of very reasonable, very just displeasure I
had to persuade away.
A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have
ever shewn me, and ten thousand for the attentions your heart will
dictate towards her.—If you think me in a way to be happier than I
deserve, I am quite of your opinion.—Miss W. calls me the child of good
fortune.
I hope she is right.—In one respect, my good fortune is
undoubted, that of being able to subscribe myself,

Your obliged and affectionate Son,

F.
C.
Weston foretold.
As soon as she came to her own name,
it was irresistible; every line relating to herself was interesting,
and almost every line agreeable; and when this charm ceased, the
subject could still maintain itself, by the natural return of her
former regard for the writer, and the very strong attraction which any
picture of love must have for her at that moment.
She never stopt till
she had gone through the whole; and though it was impossible not to
feel that he had been wrong, yet he had been less wrong than she had
supposed—and he had suffered, and was very sorry—and he was so grateful
to Mrs.
She was sure of Mrs.
Mr.
Weston was to call in the evening, and she
must return it by him.

“I would rather be talking to you,” he replied; “but as it seems a
matter of justice, it shall be done.”

He began—stopping, however, almost directly to say, “Had I been offered
the sight of one of this gentleman’s letters to his mother-in-law a few
months ago, Emma, it would not have been taken with such indifference.”

He proceeded a little farther, reading to himself; and then, with a
smile, observed, “Humph! a fine complimentary opening: But it is his
way.
One man’s style must not be the rule of another’s.
By doing it, I shall feel that I am near you.
I should wish it.”

Mr.
Knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity.

“He trifles here,” said he, “as to the temptation.
Mr.
You pass it over very handsomely—but you
were perfectly right.”

“I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma:—but yet, I think—had
_you_ not been in the case—I should still have distrusted him.”

When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged to read the whole of it
aloud—all that related to her, with a smile; a look; a shake of the
head; a word or two of assent, or disapprobation; or merely of love, as
the subject required; concluding, however, seriously, and, after steady
reflection, thus—

“Very bad—though it might have been worse.—Playing a most dangerous
game.
Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.—No judge of his
own manners by you.—Always deceived in fact by his own wishes, and
regardless of little besides his own convenience.—Fancying you to have
fathomed his secret.
My Emma, does not every thing serve to prove more
and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with
each other?”

Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet’s
account, which she could not give any sincere explanation of.

“You had better go on,” said she.
Ah!
That
was the act of a very, very young man, one too young to consider
whether the inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the
pleasure.
A boyish scheme, indeed!—I cannot comprehend a man’s wishing
to give a woman any proof of affection which he knows she would rather
dispense with; and he did know that she would have prevented the
instrument’s coming if she could.”

After this, he made some progress without any pause.
We must look to her one fault, and
remember that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the
engagement, to bear that she should have been in such a state of
punishment.”

Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party, and grew
uncomfortable.
Her own behaviour had been so very improper!
It was all read,
however, steadily, attentively, and without the smallest remark; and,
excepting one momentary glance at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear
of giving pain—no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist.

“There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends, the
Eltons,” was his next observation.—“His feelings are natural.—What!
actually resolve to break with him entirely!—She felt the engagement to
be a source of repentance and misery to each—she dissolved it.—What a
view this gives of her sense of his behaviour!—Well, he must be a most
extraordinary—”

“Nay, nay, read on.—You will find how very much he suffers.”

“I hope he does,” replied Mr.
Smallridge’s children—a
dear friend of Mrs.
Elton.
Only one page more.
I have another person’s interest at
present so much at heart, that I cannot think any longer about Frank
Churchill.
Knightley felt as strongly as herself; but the
inadmissibility of any other change, he could not agree to.
He had been
thinking it over most deeply, most intently; he had at first hoped to
induce Mr.
Woodhouse to remove with her to Donwell; he had wanted to
believe it feasible, but his knowledge of Mr.
Mr.
But the plan which had arisen on the sacrifice of this, he
trusted his dearest Emma would not find in any respect objectionable;
it was, that he should be received at Hartfield; that so long as her
father’s happiness—in other words, his life—required Hartfield to
continue her home, it should be his likewise.
Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already had her own passing
thoughts.
She felt that, in quitting Donwell, he must
be sacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits; that
in living constantly with her father, and in no house of his own, there
would be much, very much, to be borne with.
She promised to think of
it, and advised him to think of it more; but he was fully convinced,
that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the
subject.
Think she
must of the possible difference to the poor little boy; and yet she
only gave herself a saucy conscious smile about it, and found amusement
in detecting the real cause of that violent dislike of Mr.
Knightley’s
marrying Jane Fairfax, or any body else, which at the time she had
wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude of the sister and the aunt.
This proposal of his, this plan of marrying and continuing at
Hartfield—the more she contemplated it, the more pleasing it became.
His evils seemed to lessen, her own advantages to increase, their
mutual good to outweigh every drawback.
Such a companion for herself in
the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her!—Such a partner in
all those duties and cares to which time must be giving increase of
melancholy!
She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet; but every blessing
of her own seemed to involve and advance the sufferings of her friend,
who must now be even excluded from Hartfield.
The delightful family
party which Emma was securing for herself, poor Harriet must, in mere
charitable caution, be kept at a distance from.
She would be a loser in
every way.
Emma could not deplore her future absence as any deduction
from her own enjoyment.
In such a party, Harriet would be rather a dead
weight than otherwise; but for the poor girl herself, it seemed a
peculiarly cruel necessity that was to be placing her in such a state
of unmerited punishment.
Mr.
Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure;—not like
Mr.
Mr.
Knightley, always so kind, so feeling, so truly
considerate for every body, would never deserve to be less worshipped
than now; and it really was too much to hope even of Harriet, that she
could be in love with more than _three_ men in one year.
How much worse, had they been obliged to meet!
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella’s invitation; and she was
fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it, without
resorting to invention.—There was a tooth amiss.
Harriet really wished,
and had wished some time, to consult a dentist.
John Knightley was
delighted to be of use; any thing of ill health was a recommendation to
her—and though not so fond of a dentist as of a Mr.
Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr.
Knightley’s visits; now she could
talk, and she could listen with true happiness, unchecked by that sense
of injustice, of guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted
her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her, how much
might at that moment, and at a little distance, be enduring by the
feelings which she had led astray herself.
The difference of Harriet at Mrs.
Weston were safe and well.
She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure, to employ half an
hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on Miss Fairfax.—She ought
to go—and she was longing to see her; the resemblance of their present
situations increasing every other motive of goodwill.
It would be a
_secret_ satisfaction; but the consciousness of a similarity of
prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should
attend to any thing Jane might communicate.
Elton were together.
Miss Bates was out, which
accounted for the previous tranquillity.
Elton elsewhere; but she was in a humour to have patience with every
body; and as Mrs.
Elton met her with unusual graciousness, she hoped
the rencontre would do them no harm.
Elton’s thoughts, and
understand why she was, like herself, in happy spirits; it was being in
Miss Fairfax’s confidence, and fancying herself acquainted with what
was still a secret to other people.
Emma saw symptoms of it immediately
in the expression of her face; and while paying her own compliments to
Mrs.
Bates, and appearing to attend to the good old lady’s replies, she
saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which
she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax, and return it
into the purple and gold reticule by her side, saying, with significant
nods,

“We can finish this some other time, you know.
You and I shall not want
opportunities.
And, in fact, you have heard all the essential already.
You see how delightfully she writes.
Oh! she is a sweet
creature!
Let us be discreet—quite on our good behaviour.—Hush!—You
remember those lines—I forget the poem at this moment:

“For when a lady’s in the case,
“You know all other things give place.”


Now I say, my dear, in _our_ case, for _lady_, read——mum! a word to the
wise.—I am in a fine flow of spirits, an’t I?
But I want to set your
heart at ease as to Mrs.
I managed it extremely well.”

Emma could not doubt.
When they had all talked a little while in harmony
of the weather and Mrs.
But yet I think there was something wanting.
Things did not
seem—that is, there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of some.—So
it appeared to me at least, but I might be mistaken.
Woodhouse?—I am so glad.—Quite out of my power.—Such a happy little
circle as you find us here.—Yes, indeed.—Charming young man!—that is—so
very friendly; I mean good Mr.
Elton
for being there, Emma guessed that there had been a little show of
resentment towards Jane, from the vicarage quarter, which was now
graciously overcome.—After a few whispers, indeed, which placed it
beyond a guess, Mrs.
He promised to join me
here, and pay his respects to you.”

“What! are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr.
Weston and
Cole will be there too; but one is apt to speak only of those who
lead.—I fancy Mr.
Bragge;
the only school, and not more than five-and-twenty children.”

“Ah! you clever creature, that’s very true.
What a thinking brain you
have!
My liveliness and your solidity would
produce perfection.—Not that I presume to insinuate, however, that
_some_ people may not think _you_ perfection already.—But hush!—not a
word, if you please.”

It seemed an unnecessary caution; Jane was wanting to give her words,
not to Mrs.
Mr.
Elton was so hot and tired, that all this wit seemed thrown away.
And then not to find him at home!
I assure you I
am not at all pleased.
And no apology left, no message for me.
The
housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected.—Very
extraordinary!—And nobody knew at all which way he was gone.
E., he must have left a message for you, I am
sure he must.—Not even Knightley could be so very eccentric;—and his
servants forgot it.
I have nothing to do with William’s wants, but it
really is of very great importance that _I_ should see Knightley
to-day; and it becomes a matter, therefore, of very serious
inconvenience that I should have had this hot walk to no purpose.”

Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly.
Knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards
Mr.
You could not have gratified me more than by
expressing an interest—.
Indeed, Miss Woodhouse, (speaking more
collectedly,) with the consciousness which I have of misconduct, very
great misconduct, it is particularly consoling to me to know that those
of my friends, whose good opinion is most worth preserving, are not
disgusted to such a degree as to—I have not time for half that I could
wish to say.
I long to make apologies, excuses, to urge something for
myself.
I feel that all the apologies should be on my side.
I hope you
have pleasant accounts from Windsor?”

“Very.”

“And the next news, I suppose, will be, that we are to lose you—just as
I begin to know you.”

“Oh! as to all that, of course nothing can be thought of yet.
I am here
till claimed by Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell.”

“Nothing can be actually settled yet, perhaps,” replied Emma,
smiling—“but, excuse me, it must be thought of.”

The smile was returned as Jane answered,

“You are very right; it has been thought of.
And I will own to you, (I
am sure it will be safe), that so far as our living with Mr.
There must be three months, at least, of
deep mourning; but when they are over, I imagine there will be nothing
more to wait for.”

“Thank you, thank you.—This is just what I wanted to be assured of.—Oh!
if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided and
open!—Good-bye, good-bye.”




CHAPTER XVII


Mrs.
She had been decided in
wishing for a Miss Weston.
It would be a great comfort to Mr.
Weston, as
he grew older—and even Mr.
Weston—no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her;
and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to
teach, should not have their powers in exercise again.

“She has had the advantage, you know, of practising on me,” she
continued—“like La Baronne d’Almane on La Comtesse d’Ostalis, in Madame
de Genlis’ Adelaide and Theodore, and we shall now see her own little
Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan.”

“That is,” replied Mr.
Knightley, “she will indulge her even more than
she did you, and believe that she does not indulge her at all.
It will
be the only difference.”

“Poor child!” cried Emma; “at that rate, what will become of her?”

“Nothing very bad.—The fate of thousands.
I, who am owing
all my happiness to _you_, would not it be horrible ingratitude in me
to be severe on them?”

Emma laughed, and replied: “But I had the assistance of all your
endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people.
I doubt
whether my own sense would have corrected me without it.”

“Do you?—I have no doubt.
It was very natural for you to say, what
right has he to lecture me?—and I am afraid very natural for you to
feel that it was done in a disagreeable manner.
The good was all to myself, by making you an object of
the tenderest affection to me.
I could not think about you so much
without doating on you, faults and all; and by dint of fancying so many
errors, have been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at
least.”

“I am sure you were of use to me,” cried Emma. “I was very often
influenced rightly by you—oftener than I would own at the time.
I am
very sure you did me good.
In such cases my interference was giving you two bad
feelings instead of one.”

“What an amiable creature I was!—No wonder you should hold my speeches
in such affectionate remembrance.”

“‘Mr.
Knightley.’—You always called me, ‘Mr.
Knightley;’ and, from
habit, it has not so very formal a sound.—And yet it is formal.
I want
you to call me something else, but I do not know what.”

“I remember once calling you ‘George,’ in one of my amiable fits, about
ten years ago.
I did it because I thought it would offend you; but, as
you made no objection, I never did it again.”

“And cannot you call me ‘George’ now?”

“Impossible!—I never can call you any thing but ‘Mr.
Knightley.’ I will
not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs.
Elton, by
calling you Mr.
I
do not say when, but perhaps you may guess where;—in the building in
which N. takes M. for better, for worse.”

Emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to one important
service which his better sense would have rendered her, to the advice
which would have saved her from the worst of all her womanly
follies—her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith; but it was too tender a
subject.—She could not enter on it.—Harriet was very seldom mentioned
between them.
She was aware herself, that, parting under any other
circumstances, they certainly should have corresponded more, and that
her intelligence would not have rested, as it now almost wholly did, on
Isabella’s letters.
The pain of being
obliged to practise concealment towards him, was very little inferior
to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy.
Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could be
expected; on her first arrival she had thought her out of spirits,
which appeared perfectly natural, as there was a dentist to be
consulted; but, since that business had been over, she did not appear
to find Harriet different from what she had known her before.—Isabella,
to be sure, was no very quick observer; yet if Harriet had not been
equal to playing with the children, it would not have escaped her.
Emma’s comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on, by Harriet’s
being to stay longer; her fortnight was likely to be a month at least.
Emma
accepted it with a very eager hand, with an impatience all alive to
know what he would say about it, and not at all checked by hearing that
her friend was unmentioned.

“John enters like a brother into my happiness,” continued Mr.
Knightley, “but he is no complimenter; and though I well know him to
have, likewise, a most brotherly affection for you, he is so far from
making flourishes, that any other young woman might think him rather
cool in her praise.
It is very plain that he considers the
good fortune of the engagement as all on my side, but that he is not
without hope of my growing, in time, as worthy of your affection, as
you think me already.
He only means—”

“He and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two,”
interrupted she, with a sort of serious smile—“much less, perhaps, than
he is aware of, if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on the
subject.”

“Emma, my dear Emma—”

“Oh!” she cried with more thorough gaiety, “if you fancy your brother
does not do me justice, only wait till my dear father is in the secret,
and hear his opinion.
He will think all the happiness, all the
advantage, on your side of the question; all the merit on mine.
I wish
I may not sink into ‘poor Emma’ with him at once.—His tender compassion
towards oppressed worth can go no farther.”

“Ah!” he cried, “I wish your father might be half as easily convinced
as John will be, of our having every right that equal worth can give,
to be happy together.
He seems perfectly
unprepared for that.”

“Yes, yes—but I am amused that he should have seen so far into my
feelings.
What has he been judging by?—I am not conscious of any
difference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare him at this
time for my marrying any more than at another.—But it was so, I
suppose.
I dare say there was a difference when I was staying with them
the other day.
Woodhouse’s visits, Emma having it in view that
her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause, resolved first
to announce it at home, and then at Randalls.—But how to break it to
her father at last!—She had bound herself to do it, in such an hour of
Mr.
Knightley’s absence, or when it came to the point her heart would
have failed her, and she must have put it off; but Mr.
Knightley was to
come at such a time, and follow up the beginning she was to make.—She
was forced to speak, and to speak cheerfully too.
She must not make it
a more decided subject of misery to him, by a melancholy tone herself.
She must not appear to think it a misfortune.—With all the spirits she
could command, she prepared him first for something strange, and then,
in a few words, said, that if his consent and approbation could be
obtained—which, she trusted, would be attended with no difficulty,
since it was a plan to promote the happiness of all—she and Mr.
Weston, best in the world.
She was reminded, more than once, of
having always said she would never marry, and assured that it would be
a great deal better for her to remain single; and told of poor
Isabella, and poor Miss Taylor.—But it would not do.
Weston, whose marriages
taking them from Hartfield, had, indeed, made a melancholy change: but
she was not going from Hartfield; she should be always there; she was
introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts but for the
better; and she was very sure that he would be a great deal the happier
for having Mr.
Knightley always at hand, when he were once got used to
the idea.—Did he not love Mr.
Knightley very much?—He would not deny
that he did, she was sure.—Whom did he ever want to consult on business
but Mr.
Knightley?—Who was so useful to him, who so ready to write his
letters, who so glad to assist him?—Who so cheerful, so attentive, so
attached to him?—Would not he like to have him always on the spot?—Yes.
Knightley’s, whose fond
praise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcome; and he was soon
used to be talked to by each, on every fair occasion.—They had all the
assistance which Isabella could give, by letters of the strongest
approbation; and Mrs.
Weston was ready, on the first meeting, to
consider the subject in the most serviceable light—first, as a settled,
and, secondly, as a good one—well aware of the nearly equal importance
of the two recommendations to Mr.
Woodhouse’s mind.—It was agreed upon,
as what was to be; and every body by whom he was used to be guided
assuring him that it would be for his happiness; and having some
feelings himself which almost admitted it, he began to think that some
time or other—in another year or two, perhaps—it might not be so very
bad if the marriage did take place.
Mrs.
Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings in all that she
said to him in favour of the event.—She had been extremely surprized,
never more so, than when Emma first opened the affair to her; but she
saw in it only increase of happiness to all, and had no scruple in
urging him to the utmost.—She had such a regard for Mr.
Knightley could know and bear with Mr.
How to settle the claims of Enscombe
and Hartfield had been a continual impediment—less acknowledged by Mr.
It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself, and
without one real, rational difficulty to oppose or delay it.
Mrs.
If any thing
could increase her delight, it was perceiving that the baby would soon
have outgrown its first set of caps.
The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread; and Mr.
Weston
had his five minutes share of it; but five minutes were enough to
familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind.—He saw the advantages of
the match, and rejoiced in them with all the constancy of his wife; but
the wonder of it was very soon nothing; and by the end of an hour he
was not far from believing that he had always foreseen it.

“It is to be a secret, I conclude,” said he. “These matters are always
a secret, till it is found out that every body knows them.
Only let me
be told when I may speak out.—I wonder whether Jane has any suspicion.”

He went to Highbury the next morning, and satisfied himself on that
point.
Elton, immediately
afterwards.
In general, it was a very well approved match.
Oh! no;
there would be a Mrs.
But she was not at all sorry that she
had abused the housekeeper the other day.—Shocking plan, living
together.
It would never do.
She knew a family near Maple Grove who had
tried it, and been obliged to separate before the end of the first
quarter.
A few more to-morrows, and the party from London would
be arriving.
It was an alarming change; and Emma was thinking of it one
morning, as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her,
when Mr.
Knightley came in, and distressing thoughts were put by.
You are trying not
to smile.”

“I am afraid,” said he, composing his features, “I am very much afraid,
my dear Emma, that you will not smile when you hear it.”

“Indeed! but why so?—I can hardly imagine that any thing which pleases
or amuses you, should not please and amuse me too.”

“There is one subject,” he replied, “I hope but one, on which we do not
think alike.” He paused a moment, again smiling, with his eyes fixed on
her face. “Does nothing occur to you?—Do not you recollect?—Harriet
Smith.”

Her cheeks flushed at the name, and she felt afraid of something,
though she knew not what.

“Have you heard from her yourself this morning?” cried he. “You have, I
believe, and know the whole.”

“No, I have not; I know nothing; pray tell me.”

“You are prepared for the worst, I see—and very bad it is.
Knightley; “I have it from Robert
Martin himself.
He left me not half an hour ago.”

She was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement.

“You like it, my Emma, as little as I feared.—I wish our opinions were
the same.
It seems an impossibility!—You cannot mean to say,
that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin.
You cannot mean that he
has even proposed to her again—yet.
You only mean, that he intends it.”

“I mean that he has done it,” answered Mr.
Knightley, with smiling but
determined decision, “and been accepted.”

“Good God!” she cried.—“Well!”—Then having recourse to her workbasket,
in excuse for leaning down her face, and concealing all the exquisite
feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she must be
expressing, she added, “Well, now tell me every thing; make this
intelligible to me.
How, where, when?—Let me know it all.
I never was
more surprized—but it does not make me unhappy, I assure you.—How—how
has it been possible?”

“It is a very simple story.
He went to town on business three days ago,
and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to send
to John.—He delivered these papers to John, at his chambers, and was
asked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley’s.
They
were going to take the two eldest boys to Astley’s.
My friend Robert
could not resist.
He came down by yesterday’s coach, and was with me this
morning immediately after breakfast, to report his proceedings, first
on my affairs, and then on his own.
John Knightley and
little John, and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry; and that at one
time they were in such a crowd, as to make Miss Smith rather uneasy.”

He stopped.—Emma dared not attempt any immediate reply.
She must wait a moment, or he would think her mad.
His
situation is an evil—but you must consider it as what satisfies your
friend; and I will answer for your thinking better and better of him as
you know him more.
I think
Harriet is doing extremely well. _Her_ connexions may be worse than
_his_.
In respectability of character, there can be no doubt that they
are.
Knightley; “but I
should say she was a good-tempered, soft-hearted girl, not likely to be
very, very determined against any young man who told her he loved her.”

Emma could not help laughing as she answered, “Upon my word, I believe
you know her quite as well as I do.—But, Mr.
I
could suppose she might in time—but can she already?—Did not you
misunderstand him?—You were both talking of other things; of business,
shows of cattle, or new drills—and might not you, in the confusion of
so many subjects, mistake him?—It was not Harriet’s hand that he was
certain of—it was the dimensions of some famous ox.”

The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr.
Knightley and
Robert Martin was, at this moment, so strong to Emma’s feelings, and so
strong was the recollection of all that had so recently passed on
Harriet’s side, so fresh the sound of those words, spoken with such
emphasis, “No, I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin,”
that she was really expecting the intelligence to prove, in some
measure, premature.
It could not be otherwise.

“Do you dare say this?” cried Mr.
Knightley. “Do you dare to suppose me
so great a blockhead, as not to know what a man is talking of?—What do
you deserve?”

“Oh!
He asked my opinion as to what he was now to do.
Could I mention any thing more fit to be
done, than to go to Mrs.
I have taken some pains for your sake, and
for Robert Martin’s sake, (whom I have always had reason to believe as
much in love with her as ever,) to get acquainted with her.
I have
often talked to her a good deal.
You must have seen that I did.
She wanted to be alone.
Her mind was in a
state of flutter and wonder, which made it impossible for her to be
collected.
Her father’s business was to announce James’s being gone out to put the
horses to, preparatory to their now daily drive to Randalls; and she
had, therefore, an immediate excuse for disappearing.
The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect of
Harriet’s welfare, she was really in danger of becoming too happy for
security.—What had she to wish for?
Nothing, but to grow more worthy of
him, whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her
own.
She must laugh at such a close!
Such an end of the
doleful disappointment of five weeks back!
High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities, was the
reflection that all necessity of concealment from Mr.
In the gayest and happiest spirits she set forward with her father; not
always listening, but always agreeing to what he said; and, whether in
speech or silence, conniving at the comfortable persuasion of his being
obliged to go to Randalls every day, or poor Mrs.
Weston would be
disappointed.
Weston. “I was just going to
tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive this morning.
They met readily and smiling, but with a
consciousness which at first allowed little to be said; and having all
sat down again, there was for some time such a blank in the circle,
that Emma began to doubt whether the wish now indulged, which she had
long felt, of seeing Frank Churchill once more, and of seeing him with
Jane, would yield its proportion of pleasure.
Weston joined
the party, however, and when the baby was fetched, there was no longer
a want of subject or animation—or of courage and opportunity for Frank
Churchill to draw near her and say,

“I have to thank you, Miss Woodhouse, for a very kind forgiving message
in one of Mrs.
Weston’s letters.
I hope time has not made you less
willing to pardon.
I hope you do not retract what you then said.”

“No, indeed,” cried Emma, most happy to begin, “not in the least.
I am
particularly glad to see and shake hands with you—and to give you joy
in person.”

He thanked her with all his heart, and continued some time to speak
with serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness.

“Is not she looking well?” said he, turning his eyes towards Jane.
“Better than she ever used to do?—You see how my father and Mrs.
Early, I know, you
had none.”

“I never had the smallest, I assure you.”

“That appears quite wonderful.
But though I was always doing wrong things,
they were very bad wrong things, and such as did me no service.—It
would have been a much better transgression had I broken the bond of
secrecy and told you every thing.”

“It is not now worth a regret,” said Emma.

“I have some hope,” resumed he, “of my uncle’s being persuaded to pay a
visit at Randalls; he wants to be introduced to her.
When the Campbells
are returned, we shall meet them in London, and continue there, I
trust, till we may carry her northward.—But now, I am at such a
distance from her—is not it hard, Miss Woodhouse?—Till this morning, we
have not once met since the day of reconciliation.
Do not you pity me?”

Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a sudden accession of gay
thought, he cried,

“Ah! by the bye,” then sinking his voice, and looking demure for the
moment—“I hope Mr.
Knightley is well?” He paused.—She coloured and
laughed.—“I know you saw my letter, and think you may remember my wish
in your favour.
So peculiarly the lady in it.—Just colour
enough for beauty.”

“I have always admired her complexion,” replied Emma, archly; “but do
not I remember the time when you found fault with her for being so
pale?—When we first began to talk of her.—Have you quite forgotten?”

“Oh! no—what an impudent dog I was!—How could I dare—”

But he laughed so heartily at the recollection, that Emma could not
help saying,

“I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time, you
had very great amusement in tricking us all.—I am sure you had.—I am
sure it was a consolation to you.”

“Oh! no, no, no—how can you suspect me of such a thing?
I am sure it was
a source of high entertainment to you, to feel that you were taking us
all in.—Perhaps I am the readier to suspect, because, to tell you the
truth, I think it might have been some amusement to myself in the same
situation.
You can
have no superior, but most true on mine.—She is a complete angel.
Look
at her.
Is not she an angel in every gesture?
Observe the turn of her
throat.
Observe her eyes, as she is looking up at my father.—You will
be glad to hear (inclining his head, and whispering seriously) that my
uncle means to give her all my aunt’s jewels.
They are to be new set.
Perry.
Weston
had been almost as uneasy as herself.—In ten minutes, however, the
child had been perfectly well again.
Perry!
What are they saying about Mr.
Perry?—Has he been here this morning?—And how does he travel now?—Has
he set up his carriage?”

Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and while she joined in the
laugh, it was evident from Jane’s countenance that she too was really
hearing him, though trying to seem deaf.

“Such an extraordinary dream of mine!” he cried. “I can never think of
it without laughing.—She hears us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse.
I see
it in her cheek, her smile, her vain attempt to frown.
Look at her.
Knightley’s high superiority of character.
The
happiness of this most happy day, received its completion, in the
animated contemplation of his worth which this comparison produced.
Knightley, and really able to accept another man from
unbiased inclination, it was not long that she had to suffer from the
recurrence of any such uncertainty.
Knightley,
and was now forming all her views of happiness.
But what did such particulars explain?—The fact was, as Emma could now
acknowledge, that Harriet had always liked Robert Martin; and that his
continuing to love her had been irresistible.—Beyond this, it must ever
be unintelligible to Emma.
She proved to
be the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford her the
comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers, and decent enough to
have always wished for concealment.—Such was the blood of gentility
which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for!—It was likely to be
as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a gentleman: but what a
connexion had she been preparing for Mr.
Knightley—or for the
Churchills—or even for Mr.
Elton!—The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached
by nobility or wealth, would have been a stain indeed.
She had no doubt of Harriet’s
happiness with any good-tempered man; but with him, and in the home he
offered, there would be the hope of more, of security, stability, and
improvement.
She would be placed in the midst of those who loved her,
and who had better sense than herself; retired enough for safety, and
occupied enough for cheerfulness.
She would be respectable
and happy; and Emma admitted her to be the luckiest creature in the
world, to have created so steady and persevering an affection in such a
man;—or, if not quite the luckiest, to yield only to herself.
Elton as he stood before them,
could impair.—Perhaps, indeed, at that time she scarcely saw Mr.
Elton,
but as the clergyman whose blessing at the altar might next fall on
herself.—Robert Martin and Harriet Smith, the latest couple engaged of
the three, were the first to be married.
But Mr.
Woodhouse—how was Mr.
Still, however, he was not
happy.
Nay, he appeared so much otherwise, that his daughter’s courage
failed.
Knightleys, that when once the event were
over, his distress would be soon over too, she hesitated—she could not
proceed.
Woodhouse’s mind, or any wonderful change of his
nervous system, but by the operation of the same system in another
way.—Mrs.
The strength, resolution, and presence of mind of
the Mr.
John Knightley
must be in London again by the end of the first week in November.
The result of this distress was, that, with a much more voluntary,
cheerful consent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for at the
moment, she was able to fix her wedding-day—and Mr.
Robert Martin, to
join the hands of Mr.
Knightley and Miss Woodhouse.
The wedding was very much like other weddings, where the parties have
no taste for finery or parade; and Mrs.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties.
Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark.
You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.
Section 1.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.
It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.
Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work.
You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change.
The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E.
Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.
If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges.
If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3.
If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder.
Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6.
However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.
Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages.
INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.
Section 2.
Section 3.
Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.
Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.
We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.
To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
Section 5.
General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included.
Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


