Sorrow came—a gentle sorrow—but not at all in the shape of any
disagreeable consciousness.—Miss Taylor married.
Weston was
a man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, and
pleasant manners; and there was some satisfaction in considering with
what self-denying, generous friendship she had always wished and
promoted the match; but it was a black morning’s work for her.
The want
of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day.
Her sister, though comparatively but little removed by matrimony, being
settled in London, only sixteen miles off, was much beyond her daily
reach; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled
through at Hartfield, before Christmas brought the next visit from
Isabella and her husband, and their little children, to fill the house,
and give her pleasant society again.
The Woodhouses were
first in consequence there.
Emma smiled and
chatted as cheerfully as she could, to keep him from such thoughts; but
when tea came, it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had
said at dinner,

“Poor Miss Taylor!—I wish she were here again.
Weston ever thought of her!”

“I cannot agree with you, papa; you know I cannot.
Weston is such a
good-humoured, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves a
good wife;—and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for
ever, and bear all my odd humours, when she might have a house of her
own?”

“A house of her own!—But where is the advantage of a house of her own?
But James will not like to put the horses to for such a
little way;—and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying our
visit?”

“They are to be put into Mr.
And as for James, you may be very sure he will always like going
to Randalls, because of his daughter’s being housemaid there.
Whenever I see her, she always
curtseys and asks me how I do, in a very pretty manner; and when you
have had her here to do needlework, I observe she always turns the lock
of the door the right way and never bangs it.
He had returned to a late dinner, after
some days’ absence, and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all were
well in Brunswick Square.
Woodhouse for some time.
Mr.
I am afraid you must
have had a shocking walk.”

“Not at all, sir.
Who cried most?”

“Ah! poor Miss Taylor! ’Tis a sad business.”

“Poor Mr. and Miss Woodhouse, if you please; but I cannot possibly say
‘poor Miss Taylor.’ I have a great regard for you and Emma; but when it
comes to the question of dependence or independence!—At any rate, it
must be better to have only one to please than two.”

“Especially when _one_ of those two is such a fanciful, troublesome
creature!” said Emma playfully. “That is what you have in your head, I
know—and what you would certainly say if my father were not by.”

“I believe it is very true, my dear, indeed,” said Mr.
You do not think I could mean _you_, or suppose Mr.
Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know—in a
joke—it is all a joke.
Knightley, “but I meant no
reflection on any body.
The chances are that she must be
a gainer.”

“Well,” said Emma, willing to let it pass—“you want to hear about the
wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, for we all behaved
charmingly.
Knightley shook his head at her.
Pray do not make any more
matches.”

“I promise you to make none for myself, papa; but I must, indeed, for
other people.
It is the greatest amusement in the world!
Weston, who had been a widower so long, and who
seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife, so constantly occupied
either in his business in town or among his friends here, always
acceptable wherever he went, always cheerful—Mr.
Your time has been properly and delicately
spent, if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bring
about this marriage.
A worthy employment for a young lady’s mind!
There is always some talent in it.
Weston’s visits here, and given
many little encouragements, and smoothed many little matters, it might
not have come to any thing after all.
Elton.
Knightley will be so
kind as to meet him.”

“With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time,” said Mr.
Churchill, who threw her off
with due decorum.
Mrs.
She had
resolution enough to pursue her own will in spite of her brother, but
not enough to refrain from unreasonable regrets at that brother’s
unreasonable anger, nor from missing the luxuries of her former home.
From the expense of the child, however, he was soon relieved.
Churchill, having no children of their own, nor any other young
creature of equal kindred to care for, offered to take the whole charge
of the little Frank soon after her decease.
It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence his
schemes; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth, it
had not shaken his determination of never settling till he could
purchase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls was long looked forward to;
but he had gone steadily on, with these objects in view, till they were
accomplished.
His coming to visit
his father had been often talked of but never achieved.
Weston had
received. “I suppose you have heard of the handsome letter Mr.
Mr.
Mrs.
Weston’s disposition and circumstances, which would
make the approaching season no hindrance to their spending half the
evenings in the week together.
But never did she go without Mr.
Woodhouse.
What was unwholesome to him he regarded as
unfit for any body; and he had, therefore, earnestly tried to dissuade
them from having any wedding-cake at all, and when that proved vain, as
earnestly tried to prevent any body’s eating it.
Perry was an intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visits were
one of the comforts of Mr.
Elton, a young man living alone without liking it, the privilege
of exchanging any vacant evening of his own blank solitude for the
elegancies and society of Mr.
Woodhouse thought it no hardship for
either James or the horses.
And yet she was a happy woman, and
a woman whom no one named without good-will.
It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now
walked after her to church.
Goddard, requesting, in most
respectful terms, to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her; a most
welcome request: for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen, whom Emma knew
very well by sight, and had long felt an interest in, on account of her
beauty.
Encouragement should be given.
Those soft blue eyes, and all those
natural graces, should not be wasted on the inferior society of
Highbury and its connexions.
They were a family of
the name of Martin, whom Emma well knew by character, as renting a
large farm of Mr.
Knightley, and residing in the parish of Donwell—very
creditably, she believed—she knew Mr.
Serle understands boiling an egg
better than any body.
Ours are all apple-tarts.
Mrs.
Goddard, what say you to _half_ a glass of wine?
I do not think it
could disagree with you.”

Emma allowed her father to talk—but supplied her visitors in a much
more satisfactory style, and on the present evening had particular
pleasure in sending them away happy.
CHAPTER IV


Harriet Smith’s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing.
Quick
and decided in her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, encouraging,
and telling her to come very often; and as their acquaintance
increased, so did their satisfaction in each other.
As a walking
companion, Emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her.
Weston’s loss had been important.
Weston’s marriage her exercise had been too much confined.
But in every respect,
as she saw more of her, she approved her, and was confirmed in all her
kind designs.
Weston was out of the question.
Two such she did not want.
Harriet would be loved as one to whom she could be useful.
Mrs.
But the Martins occupied
her thoughts a good deal; she had spent two very happy months with
them, and now loved to talk of the pleasures of her visit, and describe
the many comforts and wonders of the place.
Martin’s having “_two_ parlours, two very good
parlours, indeed; one of them quite as large as Mrs.
Martin’s saying as she was so fond of it, it
should be called _her_ cow; and of their having a very handsome
summer-house in their garden, where some day next year they were all to
drink tea:—a very handsome summer-house, large enough to hold a dozen
people.”

For some time she was amused, without thinking beyond the immediate
cause; but as she came to understand the family better, other feelings
arose.
Harriet was very ready to
speak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry
evening games; and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very
good-humoured and obliging.
He had a very
fine flock, and, while she was with them, he had been bid more for his
wool than any body in the country.
His mother and sisters were very fond of him.
Mrs.
She was in no hurry at all.

“Well done, Mrs.
Martin was so very kind as to send
Mrs.
Martin?”

“Oh! not handsome—not at all handsome.
He has passed you very often.”

“That may be, and I may have seen him fifty times, but without having
any idea of his name.
But a farmer can need none of my help, and is, therefore, in one sense,
as much above my notice as in every other he is below it.”

“To be sure.
Oh yes!
That is too young to settle.
His mother is
perfectly right not to be in a hurry.
They seem very comfortable as
they are, and if she were to take any pains to marry him, she would
probably repent it.
Dear Miss Woodhouse, he would be thirty years old!”

“Well, and that is as early as most men can afford to marry, who are
not born to an independence.
Mr.
Martin, I imagine, has his fortune
entirely to make—cannot be at all beforehand with the world.
But they live very comfortably.
They have no
indoors man, else they do not want for any thing; and Mrs.
Martin marries, I wish you
may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters, to be acquainted
with the wife, who will probably be some mere farmer’s daughter,
without education.”

“To be sure.
He was on foot, and after looking very respectfully at
her, looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion.
Emma was
not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey; and walking a few
yards forward, while they talked together, soon made her quick eye
sufficiently acquainted with Mr.
Robert Martin.
He did not
think we ever walked this road.
He thought we walked towards Randalls
most days.
He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet.
I had imagined him, I confess, a
degree or two nearer gentility.”

“To be sure,” said Harriet, in a mortified voice, “he is not so genteel
as real gentlemen.”

“I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us, you have been
repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen, that you
must yourself be struck with the difference in Mr.
Were not you struck?
Knightley.
Knightley.
Compare their
manner of carrying themselves; of walking; of speaking; of being
silent.
Mr.
Weston must be between forty and fifty.”

“Which makes his good manners the more valuable.
Mr.
Knightley’s or Mr.
They might be
more safely held up as a pattern.
There is an openness, a quickness,
almost a bluntness in Mr.
Knightley’s downright, decided, commanding
sort of manner, though it suits _him_ very well; his figure, and look,
and situation in life seem to allow it; but if any young man were to
set about copying him, he would not be sufferable.
Elton is good-humoured, cheerful, obliging, and gentle.
I do not know
whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with either of us,
Harriet, by additional softness, but it strikes me that his manners are
softer than they used to be.
Elton, and now did full justice to; and Harriet blushed and smiled,
and said she had always thought Mr.
The longer she considered it, the greater was her sense of
its expediency.
He had a comfortable home for her, and Emma imagined a very sufficient
income; for though the vicarage of Highbury was not large, he was known
to have some independent property; and she thought very highly of him
as a good-humoured, well-meaning, respectable young man, without any
deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world.
She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful
girl, which she trusted, with such frequent meetings at Hartfield, was
foundation enough on his side; and on Harriet’s there could be little
doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all the usual
weight and efficacy.
And he was really a very pleasing young man, a
young man whom any woman not fastidious might like.
Elton’s admiration.
CHAPTER V


“I do not know what your opinion may be, Mrs.
Weston,” said Mr.
Do you really think it a bad thing?—why so?”

“I think they will neither of them do the other any good.”

“You surprize me!
Emma is spoiled by being the cleverest
of her family.
And ever since
she was twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all.
I am sure you always thought me unfit for the office I held.”

“Yes,” said he, smiling. “You are better placed _here_; very fit for a
wife, but not at all for a governess.
There will be very little merit in making a good wife to
such a man as Mr.
Weston may grow cross from the wantonness
of comfort, or his son may plague him.”

“I hope not _that_.—It is not likely.
No, Mr.
Her ignorance is hourly flattery.
And as for Harriet, I will venture to say that _she_
cannot gain by the acquaintance.
One hears sometimes of a child being ‘the picture of health;’
now, Emma always gives me the idea of being the complete picture of
grown-up health.
Emma shall be an angel, and
I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and
Isabella.
I will keep my
ill-humour to myself.
Weston gently, “very much.”

“She always declares she will never marry, which, of course, means just
nothing at all.
But there is nobody hereabouts
to attach her; and she goes so seldom from home.”

“There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break her
resolution at present,” said Mrs.
Weston, “as can well be; and while
she is so happy at Hartfield, I cannot wish her to be forming any
attachment which would be creating such difficulties on poor Mr.
Woodhouse’s account.
Weston’s on the subject, as much as possible.
Knightley soon
afterwards made to “What does Weston think of the weather; shall we
have rain?” convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise
about Hartfield.
His perception of the striking improvement of
Harriet’s manner, since her introduction at Hartfield, was not one of
the least agreeable proofs of his growing attachment.

“You have given Miss Smith all that she required,” said he; “you have
made her graceful and easy.
I almost long to attempt her likeness myself.
You do not know it I dare say, but two or three years ago I had a great
passion for taking likenesses, and attempted several of my friends, and
was thought to have a tolerable eye in general.
But from one cause or
another, I gave it up in disgust.
But really, I could almost venture,
if Harriet would sit to me.
Let me entreat you, Miss Woodhouse, to exercise so charming a talent in
favour of your friend.
Is not this room rich in specimens of your
landscapes and flowers; and has not Mrs.
Don’t pretend to be in
raptures about mine.
She thinks
so little of her own beauty.
Her many
beginnings were displayed.
Miniatures, half-lengths, whole-lengths,
pencil, crayon, and water-colours had been all tried in turn.
They were both in ecstasies.
There is my father—another of my father—but the
idea of sitting for his picture made him so nervous, that I could only
take him by stealth; neither of them very like therefore.
Weston
again, and again, and again, you see.
Weston! always my
kindest friend on every occasion.
I
could not help being provoked; for after all my pains, and when I had
really made a very good likeness of it—(Mrs.
Exactly so.
No husbands and wives,” with so interesting a
consciousness, that Emma began to consider whether she had not better
leave them together at once.
But there was no
doing any thing, with Mr.
It then occurred to her
to employ him in reading.

“If he would be so good as to read to them, it would be a kindness
indeed!
She could not respect his eye, but his love and
his complaisance were unexceptionable.
The sitting was altogether very satisfactory; she was quite enough
pleased with the first day’s sketch to wish to go on.
Elton, just as he ought,
entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again.

“By all means.
Elton was in continual raptures, and defended it through every
criticism.

“Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty she
wanted,”—observed Mrs.
It appears to
me a most perfect resemblance in every feature.
I never saw such a
likeness in my life.
Woodhouse. “So prettily done!
The only thing I do not thoroughly like is, that she
seems to be sitting out of doors, with only a little shawl over her
shoulders—and it makes one think she must catch cold.”

“But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer; a warm day in summer.
The naïveté of
Miss Smith’s manners—and altogether—Oh, it is most admirable!
It was
impossible to say how much he should be gratified by being employed on
such an errand.”

“He was too good!—she could not endure the thought!—she would not give
him such a troublesome office for the world,”—brought on the desired
repetition of entreaties and assurances,—and a very few minutes settled
the business.
Mr.
Elton was to take the drawing to London, chuse the frame, and give
the directions; and Emma thought she could so pack it as to ensure its
safety without much incommoding him, while he seemed mostly fearful of
not being incommoded enough.

“What a precious deposit!” said he with a tender sigh, as he received
it.

“This man is almost too gallant to be in love,” thought Emma. “I should
say so, but that I suppose there may be a hundred different ways of
being in love.
Elton’s going to London produced a fresh occasion
for Emma’s services towards her friend.
Goddard’s, that Mr.
The
style of the letter was much above her expectation.
I can hardly imagine the young man whom I
saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well, if
left quite to his own powers, and yet it is not the style of a woman;
no, certainly, it is too strong and concise; not diffuse enough for a
woman.
It is so with some men.
A better written letter, Harriet (returning
it,) than I had expected.”

“Well,” said the still waiting Harriet;—“well—and—and what shall I do?”

“What shall you do!
In what respect?
But what shall I say?
You will
express yourself very properly, I am sure.
Your meaning must be
unequivocal; no doubts or demurs: and such expressions of gratitude and
concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires, will
present themselves unbidden to _your_ mind, I am persuaded.
You need
not be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow for his
disappointment.”

“You think I ought to refuse him then,” said Harriet, looking down.

“Ought to refuse him!
What would you
advise me to do?
I will have nothing to do
with it.
It is not a state to be safely entered into with doubtful
feelings, with half a heart.
But do not imagine that I
want to influence you.”

“Oh! no, I am sure you are a great deal too kind to—but if you would
just advise me what I had best do—No, no, I do not mean that—As you
say, one’s mind ought to be quite made up—One should not be
hesitating—It is a very serious thing.—It will be safer to say ‘No,’
perhaps.—Do you think I had better say ‘No?’”

“Not for the world,” said Emma, smiling graciously, “would I advise you
either way.
At last, with some hesitation, Harriet said—

“Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give me your opinion, I must do as
well as I can by myself; and I have now quite determined, and really
almost made up my mind—to refuse Mr.
Martin.
You would have thrown yourself out of all good society.
It would have killed me
never to come to Hartfield any more!”

“Dear affectionate creature!—_You_ banished to Abbey-Mill Farm!—_You_
confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life!
We will not be
parted.
But how shall I do?
What shall I say?”

Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer, and
advised its being written directly, which was agreed to, in the hope of
her assistance; and though Emma continued to protest against any
assistance being wanted, it was in fact given in the formation of every
sentence.
This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and sent.
She was rather low all the evening, but
Emma could allow for her amiable regrets, and sometimes relieved them
by speaking of her own affection, sometimes by bringing forward the
idea of Mr.
You
are a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared to
Abbey-Mill.”

“And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am never happy
but at Hartfield.”

Some time afterwards it was, “I think Mrs.
The attentions of a certain person can hardly be
among the tittle-tattle of Highbury yet.
For some weeks past she had been
spending more than half her time there, and gradually getting to have a
bed-room appropriated to herself; and Emma judged it best in every
respect, safest and kindest, to keep her with them as much as possible
just at present.
Knightley called, and sat some time with Mr.
Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr.
Woodhouse, who had previously made up his
mind to walk out, was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it, and
was induced by the entreaties of both, though against the scruples of
his own civility, to leave Mr.
Mr.
I treat you without ceremony,
Mr.
Knightley.
We invalids think we are privileged people.”

“My dear sir, do not make a stranger of me.”

“I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter.
I will fetch your greatcoat and open
the garden door for you.”

Mr.
Her character depends upon those she is with; but in good
hands she will turn out a valuable woman.”

“I am glad you think so; and the good hands, I hope, may not be
wanting.”

“Come,” said he, “you are anxious for a compliment, so I will tell you
that you have improved her.
You have cured her of her school-girl’s
giggle; she really does you credit.”

“Thank you.
I can think of but one thing—Who is in love with her?
Who makes you their confidant?”

Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr.
Will that do?
He knows
I have a thorough regard for him and all his family, and, I believe,
considers me as one of his best friends.
Goddard’s to-day; and she may be detained by a visitor, without
thinking him at all a tiresome wretch.”

“Pray, Mr.
Knightley,” said Emma, who had been smiling to herself
through a great part of this speech, “how do you know that Mr.
Knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasure, as he
stood up, in tall indignation, and said,

“Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed her.
A man always
imagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her.”

“Nonsense! a man does not imagine any such thing.
Emma, this is your
doing.
You persuaded her to refuse him.”

“And if I did, (which, however, I am far from allowing) I should not
feel that I had done wrong.
Martin is a very respectable young man,
but I cannot admit him to be Harriet’s equal; and am rather surprized
indeed that he should have ventured to address her.
By your account, he
does seem to have had some scruples.
It is a pity that they were ever
got over.”

“Not Harriet’s equal!” exclaimed Mr.
Knightley loudly and warmly; and
with calmer asperity, added, a few moments afterwards, “No, he is not
her equal indeed, for he is as much her superior in sense as in
situation.
At her age she
can have no experience, and with her little wit, is not very likely
ever to have any that can avail her.
My only scruple in advising the match was on
his account, as being beneath his deserts, and a bad connexion for him.
But I could not reason so to a man in love, and was willing to
trust to there being no harm in her, to her having that sort of
disposition, which, in good hands, like his, might be easily led aright
and turn out very well.
What! think a farmer, (and with all his sense and all
his merit Mr.
Martin is nothing more,) a good match for my intimate
friend!
I assure you
mine are very different.
They would be estimated very
differently by others as well as myself; Mr.
Her friends
evidently thought this good enough for her; and it _was_ good enough.
She was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer.
If she has it now, you have given
it.
And as to
conceit, he is the farthest from it of any man I know.
Were you, yourself, ever to
marry, she is the very woman for you.
You will
puff her up with such ideas of her own beauty, and of what she has a
claim to, that, in a little while, nobody within her reach will be good
enough for her.
Nothing so easy as for a young lady to raise her expectations
too high.
Men of family would not be very
fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such obscurity—and most
prudent men would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they
might be involved in, when the mystery of her parentage came to be
revealed.
Let her marry Robert Martin, and she is safe, respectable,
and happy for ever; but if you encourage her to expect to marry
greatly, and teach her to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of
consequence and large fortune, she may be a parlour-boarder at Mrs.
I can imagine, that
before she had seen any body superior, she might tolerate him.
Your views for Harriet are best known
to yourself; but as you make no secret of your love of match-making, it
is fair to suppose that views, and plans, and projects you have;—and as
a friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton is the man, I think it
will be all labour in vain.”

Emma laughed and disclaimed.
Elton may talk sentimentally, but he will act rationally.
He knows that he is a very handsome young man, and a great favourite
wherever he goes; and from his general way of talking in unreserved
moments, when there are only men present, I am convinced that he does
not mean to throw himself away.
I have done with match-making indeed.
He
walked off in more complete self-approbation than he left for her.
Harriet’s
staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy.
Knightley think or say what he would, she had done nothing which
woman’s friendship and woman’s feelings would not justify.
Knightley could not have observed him as she had done, neither
with the interest, nor (she must be allowed to tell herself, in spite
of Mr.
Mr.
Elton.
Martin, but to talk of Mr.
Perry had been to Mrs.
Elton was actually on his road to
London, and not meaning to return till the morrow, though it was the
whist-club night, which he had been never known to miss before; and Mr.
Elton had been determined to go on, and had said in a _very_
_particular_ way indeed, that he was going on business which he would
not put off for any inducement in the world; and something about a very
enviable commission, and being the bearer of something exceedingly
precious.
Perry could not quite understand him, but he was very
sure there must be a _lady_ in the case, and he told him so; and Mr.
Elton could prefer, she should
think the luckiest woman in the world; for, beyond a doubt, Mr.
She was sorry, but could not
repent.
The Picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand soon after Mr.
Goddard’s, had written
out at least three hundred; and Harriet, who had taken the first hint
of it from her, hoped, with Miss Woodhouse’s help, to get a great many
more.
He was afraid not even Miss Woodhouse”—he
stopt a moment—“or Miss Smith could inspire him.”

The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration.
He called
for a few moments, just to leave a piece of paper on the table
containing, as he said, a charade, which a friend of his had addressed
to a young lady, the object of his admiration, but which, from his
manner, Emma was immediately convinced must be his own.

“I do not offer it for Miss Smith’s collection,” said he. “Being my
friend’s, I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye,
but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it.”

The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet, which Emma could
understand.
Another view of man, my second brings,
    Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!
This is saying very plainly—‘Pray, Miss Smith,
give me leave to pay my addresses to you.
Thy ready wit the word will soon supply.
All the better.
A man must be very much in
love, indeed, to describe her so.
For once in your life
you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken.
Can it be Neptune?
Or a trident? or a mermaid? or a shark?
Oh!
Give me the paper and listen.
Read it in comfort to yourself.
She read the
concluding lines, and was all flutter and happiness.
It was enough for her to feel.
Elton’s intentions.
Its probability and its
eligibility have really so equalled each other!
This is an
attachment which a woman may well feel pride in creating.
It is so much beyond any thing I deserve.
You and Mr.
Your marrying
will be equal to the match at Randalls.
The course of true love never did run smooth—


A Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long note on that
passage.”

“That Mr.
Elton should really be in love with me,—me, of all people,
who did not know him, to speak to him, at Michaelmas!
His company so sought after, that every body
says he need not eat a single meal by himself if he does not chuse it;
that he has more invitations than there are days in the week.
How little did I think!—The two Abbots and
I ran into the front room and peeped through the blind when we heard he
was going by, and Miss Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to look
through herself; however, she called me back presently, and let me look
too, which was very good-natured.
He was arm-in-arm with Mr.
Elton are one as clever as the
other.
Such
things in general cannot be too short.”

Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear.
Miss
Woodhouse, what can we do about that?”

“Leave it to me.
You do nothing.
The couplet does not cease to be, nor does its
meaning change.
A poet in love must be encouraged in both capacities,
or neither.
He loves any thing of the sort, and especially any
thing that pays woman a compliment.
Do as you please.”

Mr.
Woodhouse came in, and very soon led to the subject again, by the
recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of “Well, my dears, how does
your book go on?—Have you got any thing fresh?”

“Yes, papa; we have something to read you, something quite fresh.
Your dear mother
was so clever at all those things!
But I think, my dear, you said you had got it.”

“Yes, papa, it is written out in our second page.
Mr.
Isabella cannot bear to stay behind her
husband.”

This was too true for contradiction.
We are very proud of the children, are not we, papa?
Some people are surprized, I believe, that
the eldest was not, but Isabella would have him called Henry, which I
thought very pretty of her.
They
are all remarkably clever; and they have so many pretty ways.
They will
come and stand by my chair, and say, ‘Grandpapa, can you give me a bit
of string?’ and once Henry asked me for a knife, but I told him knives
were only made for grandpapas.
He wishes his boys to be active and hardy; and if they
misbehave, can give them a sharp word now and then; but he is an
affectionate father—certainly Mr.
Harriet turned away; but Emma could
receive him with the usual smile, and her quick eye soon discerned in
his the consciousness of having made a push—of having thrown a die; and
she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up.
He re-urged—she
re-declined; and he seemed then about to make his bow, when taking the
paper from the table, she returned it—

“Oh! here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us;
thank you for the sight of it.
Your friend will not
take it amiss I hope.
He looked
rather doubtingly—rather confused; said something about
“honour,”—glanced at Emma and at Harriet, and then seeing the book open
on the table, took it up, and examined it very attentively.
CHAPTER X


Though now the middle of December, there had yet been no weather to
prevent the young ladies from tolerably regular exercise; and on the
morrow, Emma had a charitable visit to pay to a poor sick family, who
lived a little way out of Highbury.
It had
no advantage of situation; but had been very much smartened up by the
present proprietor; and, such as it was, there could be no possibility
of the two friends passing it without a slackened pace and observing
eyes.—Emma’s remark was—

“There it is.
Were I to fall
in love, indeed, it would be a different thing! but I never have been
in love; it is not my way, or my nature; and I do not think I ever
shall.
Fortune I do not want; employment I do not want;
consequence I do not want: I believe few married women are half as much
mistress of their husband’s house as I am of Hartfield; and never,
never could I expect to be so truly beloved and important; so always
first and always right in any man’s eyes as I am in my father’s.”

“But then, to be an old maid at last, like Miss Bates!”

“That is as formidable an image as you could present, Harriet; and if I
thought I should ever be like Miss Bates! so silly—so satisfied—so
smiling—so prosing—so undistinguishing and unfastidious—and so apt to
tell every thing relative to every body about me, I would marry
to-morrow.
And the distinction is not quite so much
against the candour and common sense of the world as appears at first;
for a very narrow income has a tendency to contract the mind, and sour
the temper.
And as for
objects of interest, objects for the affections, which is in truth the
great point of inferiority, the want of which is really the great evil
to be avoided in _not_ marrying, I shall be very well off, with all the
children of a sister I love so much, to care about.
One is sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax.
In
the present instance, it was sickness and poverty together which she
came to visit; and after remaining there as long as she could give
comfort or advice, she quitted the cottage with such an impression of
the scene as made her say to Harriet, as they walked away,

“These are the sights, Harriet, to do one good.
How trifling they make
every thing else appear!—I feel now as if I could think of nothing but
these poor creatures all the rest of the day; and yet, who can say how
soon it may all vanish from my mind?”

“Very true,” said Harriet. “Poor creatures! one can think of nothing
else.”

“And really, I do not think the impression will soon be over,” said
Emma, as she crossed the low hedge, and tottering footstep which ended
the narrow, slippery path through the cottage garden, and brought them
into the lane again. “I do not think it will,” stopping to look once
more at all the outward wretchedness of the place, and recall the still
greater within.

“Oh! dear, no,” said her companion.
They walked on.
Well, (smiling,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion
has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers, it has done all that
is truly important.
His visit
he would now defer; but they had a very interesting parley about what
could be done and should be done.
I wish I were anywhere else.”

Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could, she soon
afterwards took possession of a narrow footpath, a little raised on one
side of the lane, leaving them together in the main road.
But she had
not been there two minutes when she found that Harriet’s habits of
dependence and imitation were bringing her up too, and that, in short,
they would both be soon after her.
This would not do; she immediately
stopped, under pretence of having some alteration to make in the lacing
of her half-boot, and stooping down in complete occupation of the
footpath, begged them to have the goodness to walk on, and she would
follow in half a minute.
Mr.
Elton was speaking with
animation, Harriet listening with a very pleased attention; and Emma,
having sent the child on, was beginning to think how she might draw
back a little more, when they both looked around, and she was obliged
to join them.
If I
could but have kept longer away!”

They now walked on together quietly, till within view of the vicarage
pales, when a sudden resolution, of at least getting Harriet into the
house, made her again find something very much amiss about her boot,
and fall behind to arrange it once more.
It had a most
favourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma felt the glory of
having schemed successfully.
Elton must now be left to himself.
They
might advance rapidly if they would, however; they must advance somehow
or other whether they would or no.
John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle,
quiet manners, and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate;
wrapt up in her family; a devoted wife, a doating mother, and so
tenderly attached to her father and sister that, but for these higher
ties, a warmer love might have seemed impossible.
She was not a woman of strong understanding or
any quickness; and with this resemblance of her father, she inherited
also much of his constitution; was delicate in her own health,
over-careful of that of her children, had many fears and many nerves,
and was as fond of her own Mr.
They were alike too, in a general benevolence of temper,
and a strong habit of regard for every old acquaintance.
Mr.
He was not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law.
She was quick in feeling the little injuries to
Isabella, which Isabella never felt herself.
Perhaps she might have
passed over more had his manners been flattering to Isabella’s sister,
but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend, without
praise and without blindness; but hardly any degree of personal
compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of all
in her eyes which he sometimes fell into, the want of respectful
forbearance towards her father.
Mr.
They had not been long seated and
composed when Mr.
I never saw Mrs.
Weston better in my
life—never looking so well.
Papa is only speaking his own regret.”

“Very much to the honour of both,” was the handsome reply.

“And do you see her, sir, tolerably often?” asked Isabella in the
plaintive tone which just suited her father.
Papa, if you speak in that melancholy
way, you will be giving Isabella a false idea of us all.
Weston, does come and see us pretty
often—but then—she is always obliged to go away again.”

“It would be very hard upon Mr.
Weston has
some little claim.
I, being a husband, and you not being a wife, the
claims of the man may very likely strike us with equal force.
I shall never forget his
flying Henry’s kite for him that very windy day last Easter—and ever
since his particular kindness last September twelvemonth in writing
that note, at twelve o’clock at night, on purpose to assure me that
there was no scarlet fever at Cobham, I have been convinced there could
not be a more feeling heart nor a better man in existence.—If any body
can deserve him, it must be Miss Taylor.”

“Where is the young man?” said John Knightley. “Has he been here on
this occasion—or has he not?”

“He has not been here yet,” replied Emma. “There was a strong
expectation of his coming soon after the marriage, but it ended in
nothing; and I have not heard him mentioned lately.”

“But you should tell them of the letter, my dear,” said her father. “He
wrote a letter to poor Mrs.
I remember it was written from Weymouth, and dated Sept.
28th—and began, ‘My dear Madam,’ but I forget how it went on; and it
was signed ‘F.
John
Knightley. “I have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man.
There is
something so shocking in a child’s being taken away from his parents
and natural home!
Weston is
rather an easy, cheerful-tempered man, than a man of strong feelings;
he takes things as he finds them, and makes enjoyment of them somehow
or other, depending, I suspect, much more upon what is called society
for his comforts, that is, upon the power of eating and drinking, and
playing whist with his neighbours five times a week, than upon family
affection, or any thing that home affords.”

Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on Mr.
Weston, and
had half a mind to take it up; but she struggled, and let it pass.
CHAPTER XII


Mr.
Woodhouse, who did not like that any one should share with him in
Isabella’s first day.
She thought it was time
to make up.
Come, my dear Emma,
let us be friends, and say no more about it.
Tell your aunt, little
Emma, that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing
old grievances, and that if she were not wrong before, she is now.”

“That’s true,” she cried—“very true.
Be infinitely cleverer and not half so conceited.
The evening was quiet and conversable, as Mr.
Woodhouse declined cards
entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella, and
the little party made two natural divisions; on one side he and his
daughter; on the other the two Mr.
As a magistrate, he had
generally some point of law to consult John about, or, at least, some
curious anecdote to give; and as a farmer, as keeping in hand the
home-farm at Donwell, he had to tell what every field was to bear next
year, and to give all such local information as could not fail of being
interesting to a brother whose home it had equally been the longest
part of his life, and whose attachments were strong.
While they were thus comfortably occupied, Mr.
Woodhouse was enjoying a
full flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter.

“My poor dear Isabella,” said he, fondly taking her hand, and
interrupting, for a few moments, her busy labours for some one of her
five children—“How long it is, how terribly long since you were here!
You must go to bed early,
my dear—and I recommend a little gruel to you before you go.—You and I
will have a nice basin of gruel together.
Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as
herself;—and two basins only were ordered.
I never had much opinion of the sea air.”

“Mr.
My dear
Isabella, I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr.
But then there is not so clever a man any where.”

“And Mrs.
Perry.
I hope he will be calling soon.
Either bathing has been of the greatest service to
her, or else it is to be attributed to an excellent embrocation of Mr.
Bates had a
bad cold about a month ago.”

“How sorry I am!
But colds were never so prevalent as they have been
this autumn.
Wingfield told me that he has never known them more
general or heavy—except when it has been quite an influenza.”

“That has been a good deal the case, my dear; but not to the degree you
mention.
Perry says that colds have been very general, but not so heavy
as he has very often known them in November.
Perry does not call it
altogether a sickly season.”

“No, I do not know that Mr.
Wingfield considers it _very_ sickly
except—

“Ah! my poor dear child, the truth is, that in London it is always a
sickly season.
Nobody is healthy in London, nobody can be.
The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very
different from almost all the rest.
Wingfield thinks the vicinity of
Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air.”

“Ah! my dear, it is not like Hartfield.
I hope you will think better of their looks to-morrow; for I
assure you Mr.
Knightley looking ill,” turning her eyes with
affectionate anxiety towards her husband.

“Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you.
John
Knightley, hearing his own name.

“I am sorry to find, my love, that my father does not think you looking
well—but I hope it is only from being a little fatigued.
What will it answer?
John Knightley.—“It is so
long since I have seen her, except now and then for a moment
accidentally in town!
Emma could not have a
better companion than Harriet.”

“I am most happy to hear it—but only Jane Fairfax one knows to be so
very accomplished and superior!—and exactly Emma’s age.”

This topic was discussed very happily, and others succeeded of similar
moment, and passed away with similar harmony; but the evening did not
close without a little return of agitation.
After an interval of some
minutes, however, he began with,

“I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn,
instead of coming here.”

“But why should you be sorry, sir?—I assure you, it did the children a
great deal of good.”

“And, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it had better not have been
to South End.
South End is an unhealthy place.
Wingfield says it is
entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy; and I am sure he may
be depended on, for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air,
and his own brother and family have been there repeatedly.”

“You should have gone to Cromer, my dear, if you went anywhere.—Perry
was a week at Cromer once, and he holds it to be the best of all the
sea-bathing places.
You should have
consulted Perry.”

“But, my dear sir, the difference of the journey;—only consider how
great it would have been.—An hundred miles, perhaps, instead of forty.”

“Ah! my dear, as Perry says, where health is at stake, nothing else
should be considered; and if one is to travel, there is not much to
chuse between forty miles and an hundred.—Better not move at all,
better stay in London altogether than travel forty miles to get into a
worse air.
Why does he make it
any business of his, to wonder at what I do?—at my taking my family to
one part of the coast or another?—I may be allowed, I hope, the use of
my judgment as well as Mr.
I should not attempt it, if it were to be the means of
inconvenience to the Highbury people, but if you call to mind exactly
the present line of the path....
Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections on his
friend Perry, to whom he had, in fact, though unconsciously, been
attributing many of his own feelings and expressions;—but the soothing
attentions of his daughters gradually removed the present evil, and the
immediate alertness of one brother, and better recollections of the
other, prevented any renewal of it.
John
Knightley, in this short visit to Hartfield, going about every morning
among her old acquaintance with her five children, and talking over
what she had done every evening with her father and sister.
It was a delightful visit;—perfect, in being much too short.
In general their evenings were less engaged with friends than their
mornings; but one complete dinner engagement, and out of the house too,
there was no avoiding, though at Christmas.
Woodhouse should dine out, on the 24th of December) had been spent
by Harriet at Hartfield, and she had gone home so much indisposed with
a cold, that, but for her own earnest wish of being nursed by Mrs.
Emma sat with her as long as she could, to attend her in Mrs.
John Knightley returning from the daily visit to Donwell, with his two
eldest boys, whose healthy, glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a
country run, and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton
and rice pudding they were hastening home for.
Emma was just describing the nature of her friend’s
complaint;—“a throat very much inflamed, with a great deal of heat
about her, a quick, low pulse, &c. and she was sorry to find from Mrs.
I hope not of a putrid
infectious sort.
Why does not Perry see her?”

Emma, who was not really at all frightened herself, tranquillised this
excess of apprehension by assurances of Mrs.
But, upon my word, Mr.
Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make;
which was exactly the case; for though very much gratified by the kind
care of such a fair lady, and not liking to resist any advice of her’s,
he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit;—but Emma,
too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear
him impartially, or see him with clear vision, was very well satisfied
with his muttering acknowledgment of its being “very cold, certainly
very cold,” and walked on, rejoicing in having extricated him from
Randalls, and secured him the power of sending to inquire after Harriet
every hour of the evening.

“You do quite right,” said she;—“we will make your apologies to Mr. and
Mrs.
After a few minutes of entire silence between them, John Knightley
began with—

“I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr.
With
men he can be rational and unaffected, but when he has ladies to
please, every feature works.”

“Mr.
Where a man does his best with only moderate powers, he
will have the advantage over negligent superiority.
Elton’s object?”

“Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma; and if it never
occurred to you before, you may as well take it into consideration
now.”

“Mr.
I think your
manners to him encouraging.
You had better
look about you, and ascertain what you do, and what you mean to do.”

“I thank you; but I assure you you are quite mistaken.
Mr.
He said no more.
Mr.
The cold, however, was
severe; and by the time the second carriage was in motion, a few flakes
of snow were finding their way down, and the sky had the appearance of
being so overcharged as to want only a milder air to produce a very
white world in a very short time.
Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour.
The
preparing and the going abroad in such weather, with the sacrifice of
his children after dinner, were evils, were disagreeables at least,
which Mr.
It is the greatest
absurdity—Actually snowing at this moment!—The folly of not allowing
people to be comfortable at home—and the folly of people’s not staying
comfortably at home when they can!
They arrived, the carriage turned, the step was let down, and Mr.
Emma
thought with pleasure of some change of subject.
Goddard’s door, which I did the very last thing
before I returned to dress, I was told that Miss Smith was not better,
by no means better, rather worse.
Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there been
much snow on the ground; but now it is of no consequence.
I was snowed up at a friend’s house once for a week.
John Knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasure, but
said only, coolly,

“I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Randalls.”

At another time Emma might have been amused, but she was too much
astonished now at Mr.
To her it was real enjoyment to be with the Westons.
Weston
had not a lively concern; and half an hour’s uninterrupted
communication of all those little matters on which the daily happiness
of private life depends, was one of the first gratifications of each.
This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day’s visit might not
afford, which certainly did not belong to the present half-hour; but
the very sight of Mrs.
Elton for a while made her rather
sorry to find, when they had all taken their places, that he was close
to her.
The difficulty was great of driving his strange insensibility
towards Harriet, from her mind, while he not only sat at her elbow, but
was continually obtruding his happy countenance on her notice, and
solicitously addressing her upon every occasion.
She could not but suppose it to be a
match that every body who knew them must think of.
Weston did think of it, she was very strongly persuaded; and though not
meaning to be induced by him, or by any body else, to give up a
situation which she believed more replete with good than any she could
change it for, she had a great curiosity to see him, a decided
intention of finding him pleasant, of being liked by him to a certain
degree, and a sort of pleasure in the idea of their being coupled in
their friends’ imaginations.
Elton’s civilities were dreadfully ill-timed;
but she had the comfort of appearing very polite, while feeling very
cross—and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possibly
pass without bringing forward the same information again, or the
substance of it, from the open-hearted Mr.
I should like to
see two more here,—your pretty little friend, Miss Smith, and my
son—and then I should say we were quite complete.
Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making their
party quite complete.

“He has been wanting to come to us,” continued Mr.
If
they are not put off, he cannot stir.
But I know they will, because it
is a family that a certain lady, of some consequence, at Enscombe, has
a particular dislike to: and though it is thought necessary to invite
them once in two or three years, they always are put off when it comes
to the point.
I cannot be so sanguine as
Mr.
Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world.”

“My Emma!” replied Mrs.
Frank Churchill, in my opinion, as his father
thinks.
To you—to my two daughters—I may venture on the
truth.
Churchill,” replied
Isabella: “and I am sure I never think of that poor young man without
the greatest compassion.
What a blessing, that she
never had any children!
Poor little creatures, how unhappy she would
have made them!”

Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs.
Weston.
While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found an opportunity of
saying,

“And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any means
certain.
I am sorry for it.
Now, according to my idea of Mrs.
I have no doubt of his having, at times, considerable influence; but it
may be perfectly impossible for him to know beforehand _when_ it will
be.”

Emma listened, and then coolly said, “I shall not be satisfied, unless
he comes.”

“He may have a great deal of influence on some points,” continued Mrs.
Weston, “and on others, very little: and among those, on which she is
beyond his reach, it is but too likely, may be this very circumstance
of his coming away from them to visit us.”




CHAPTER XV


Mr.
Mrs.
Emma, in good spirits too, from the amusement afforded her mind by the
expectation of Mr.
Frank Churchill, was willing to forget his late
improprieties, and be as well satisfied with him as before, and on his
making Harriet his very first subject, was ready to listen with most
friendly smiles.
Perry and learnt his opinion; and
though she tried to laugh it off and bring the subject back into its
proper course, there was no putting an end to his extreme solicitude
about her.
It did appear—there was no concealing
it—exactly like the pretence of being in love with her, instead of
Harriet; an inconstancy, if real, the most contemptible and abominable!
and she had difficulty in behaving with temper.
He turned to Mrs.
Weston to implore her assistance, “Would not she give him her
support?—would not she add her persuasions to his, to induce Miss
Woodhouse not to go to Mrs.
Goddard’s till it were certain that Miss
Smith’s disorder had no infection?
He could not be satisfied without a
promise—would not she give him her influence in procuring it?”

“So scrupulous for others,” he continued, “and yet so careless for
herself!
Weston?—Judge between us.
I admired your spirit;
and I dare say we shall get home very well.
Another hour or two’s snow
can hardly make the road impassable; and we are two carriages; if one
is blown over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the
other at hand.
I dare say we shall be all safe at Hartfield before
midnight.”

Mr.
Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was confessing that he
had known it to be snowing some time, but had not said a word, lest it
should make Mr.
Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse for his
hurrying away.
He wished the road might be impassable,
that he might be able to keep them all at Randalls; and with the utmost
good-will was sure that accommodation might be found for every body,
calling on his wife to agree with him, that with a little contrivance,
every body might be lodged, which she hardly knew how to do, from the
consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house.

“What is to be done, my dear Emma?—what is to be done?” was Mr.
To her he looked for comfort; and her assurances of safety, her
representation of the excellence of the horses, and of James, and of
their having so many friends about them, revived him a little.
Weston for her approbation of the plan.
He had gone beyond the sweep—some way along the Highbury
road—the snow was nowhere above half an inch deep—in many places hardly
enough to whiten the ground; a very few flakes were falling at present,
but the clouds were parting, and there was every appearance of its
being soon over.
To Isabella, the relief of such tidings was very great, and they were
scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father’s account, who was
immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous
constitution allowed; but the alarm that had been raised could not be
appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued at
Randalls.
He did not know what they had best do.
They must keep as much together
as they could;” and James was talked to, and given a charge to go very
slow and wait for the other carriage.
But now, she would rather it had not happened.
Weston’s good wine, and felt sure that he
would want to be talking nonsense.
Elton actually making violent love to her: availing himself of the
precious opportunity, declaring sentiments which must be already well
known, hoping—fearing—adoring—ready to die if she refused him; but
flattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled love and
unexampled passion could not fail of having some effect, and in short,
very much resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as possible.
She tried to stop him; but vainly; he would go on, and say
it all.
She felt that half this folly must
be drunkenness, and therefore could hope that it might belong only to
the passing hour.
Accordingly, with a mixture of the serious and the
playful, which she hoped would best suit his half and half state, she
replied,

“I am very much astonished, Mr.
This to _me_! you forget
yourself—you take me for my friend—any message to Miss Smith I shall be
happy to deliver; but no more of this to _me_, if you please.”

“Miss Smith!—message to Miss Smith!—What could she possibly mean!”—And
he repeated her words with such assurance of accent, such boastful
pretence of amazement, that she could not help replying with quickness,

“Mr.
Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct! and I can account
for it only in one way; you are not yourself, or you could not speak
either to me, or of Harriet, in such a manner.
Elton, my astonishment is much beyond any thing I can
express.
Believe me,
sir, I am far, very far, from gratified in being the object of such
professions.”

“Good Heaven!” cried Mr.
I have thought only of
you.
No!—(in an accent meant to be
insinuating)—I am sure you have seen and understood me.”

It would be impossible to say what Emma felt, on hearing this—which of
all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost.
So far from having
long understood you, I have been in a most complete error with respect
to your views, till this moment.
I need not so totally despair of an equal
alliance, as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith!—No, madam, my
visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only; and the encouragement
I received—”

“Encouragement!—I give you encouragement!—Sir, you have been entirely
mistaken in supposing it.
I am exceedingly sorry: but it is well that the mistake
ends where it does.
If
there had not been so much anger, there would have been desperate
awkwardness; but their straightforward emotions left no room for the
little zigzags of embarrassment.
Without knowing when the carriage
turned into Vicarage Lane, or when it stopped, they found themselves,
all at once, at the door of his house; and he was out before another
syllable passed.—Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a good
night.
The compliment was just returned, coldly and proudly; and, under
indescribable irritation of spirits, she was then conveyed to
Hartfield.
There she was welcomed, with the utmost delight, by her father, who had
been trembling for the dangers of a solitary drive from Vicarage
Lane—turning a corner which he could never bear to think of—and in
strange hands—a mere common coachman—no James; and there it seemed as
if her return only were wanted to make every thing go well: for Mr.
She looked back as well as she
could; but it was all confusion.
His manners, however, must
have been unmarked, wavering, dubious, or she could not have been so
misled.
Elton’s wanting to pay his
addresses to her had sunk him in her opinion.
His professions and his
proposals did him no service.
Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he was her
inferior in talent, and all the elegancies of mind.
I was introducing her into good company, and giving her the
opportunity of pleasing some one worth having; I ought not to have
attempted more.
Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had gone
to bed, more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her, and to
depend on getting tolerably out of it.
Elton’s absenting himself.
It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home; and
though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some
society or other, it was very pleasant to have her father so well
satisfied with his being all alone in his own house, too wise to stir
out; and to hear him say to Mr.
But with all the hopes
of cheerfulness, and all the present comfort of delay, there was still
such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation with Harriet,
as made it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease.
Elton to Mr.
Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, with
Mr.
Woodhouse, of whose friendly civilities he should ever
retain a grateful sense—and had Mr.
Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than
in a civility to her father, from which she was so pointedly excluded.
It did, however.—Her father was quite taken up with the surprize of so
sudden a journey, and his fears that Mr.
She got her to
Hartfield, and shewed her the most unvarying kindness, striving to
occupy and amuse her, and by books and conversation, to drive Mr.
If Mr.
Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as evident and
indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do, she could not
imagine Harriet’s persisting to place her happiness in the sight or the
recollection of him.
They must encounter each
other, and make the best of it.
Elton being the adoration of all the teachers and great
girls in the school; and it must be at Hartfield only that she could
have any chance of hearing him spoken of with cooling moderation or
repellent truth.
It soon flies over the present failure,
and begins to hope again.
Weston, of a
more apprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing but a repetition of
excuses and delays; and after all her concern for what her husband was
to suffer, suffered a great deal more herself.
The acquaintance at present had no charm for her.
She was the first to announce it to Mr.
She then
proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt, of the advantage of
such an addition to their confined society in Surry; the pleasure of
looking at somebody new; the gala-day to Highbury entire, which the
sight of him would have made; and ending with reflections on the
Churchills again, found herself directly involved in a disagreement
with Mr.
Weston’s arguments against herself.

“The Churchills are very likely in fault,” said Mr.
He wishes exceedingly to come;
but his uncle and aunt will not spare him.”

“I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming, if he made a
point of it.
What has Mr.
Frank Churchill done, to make you
suppose him such an unnatural creature?”

“I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature, in suspecting
that he may have learnt to be above his connexions, and to care very
little for any thing but his own pleasure, from living with those who
have always set him the example of it.
If Frank Churchill had wanted to see his father, he would have
contrived it between September and January.
You are the worst judge in the world, Mr.
Knightley, of the
difficulties of dependence.
This proves that he can
leave the Churchills.”

“Yes, sometimes he can.”

“And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while; whenever
there is any temptation of pleasure.”

“It is very unfair to judge of any body’s conduct, without an intimate
knowledge of their situation.
Mr.
He would feel himself in the right; and the declaration—made, of
course, as a man of sense would make it, in a proper manner—would do
him more good, raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the
people he depended on, than all that a line of shifts and expedients
can ever do.
Respect for right conduct is felt by every body.
You are very fond of bending little minds; but
where little minds belong to rich people in authority, I think they
have a knack of swelling out, till they are quite as unmanageable as
great ones.
Frank Churchill’s
situation, you would be able to say and do just what you have been
recommending for him; and it might have a very good effect.
He may have as strong a sense of what would be right,
as you can have, without being so equal, under particular
circumstances, to act up to it.”

“Then it would not be so strong a sense.
If it failed to produce equal
exertion, it could not be an equal conviction.”

“Oh, the difference of situation and habit!
Had he begun as he ought, there
would have been no difficulty now.”

“We shall never agree about him,” cried Emma; “but that is nothing
extraordinary.
His letters disgust me.”

“Your feelings are singular.
Weston.
It is on her
account that attention to Randalls is doubly due, and she must doubly
feel the omission.
Knightley, what a _sensation_ his
coming will produce?
To you, he will talk of farming; to me, of drawing or music;
and so on to every body, having that general information on all
subjects which will enable him to follow the lead, or take the lead,
just as propriety may require, and to speak extremely well on each;
that is my idea of him.”

“And mine,” said Mr.
We are both prejudiced; you against, I for him; and we have no
chance of agreeing till he is really here.”

“Prejudiced!
My love
for Mr. and Mrs.
She could
not think that Harriet’s solace or her own sins required more; and she
was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they
returned;—but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded,
and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter,
and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive—“Mr.
Knightley and some from her own heart,
as to her deficiency—but none were equal to counteract the persuasion
of its being very disagreeable,—a waste of time—tiresome women—and all
the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second-rate and
third-rate of Highbury, who were calling on them for ever, and
therefore she seldom went near them.
But now she made the sudden
resolution of not passing their door without going in—observing, as she
proposed it to Harriet, that, as well as she could calculate, they were
just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax.
The house belonged to people in business.
Woodhouse’s health, cheerful communications about her mother’s, and
sweet-cake from the beaufet—“Mrs.
There was intimacy between them, and Mr.
Emma knew what was coming; they must have the
letter over again, and settle how long he had been gone, and how much
he was engaged in company, and what a favourite he was wherever he
went, and how full the Master of the Ceremonies’ ball had been; and she
went through it very well, with all the interest and all the
commendation that could be requisite, and always putting forward to
prevent Harriet’s being obliged to say a word.
Cole was
telling me that dancing at the rooms at Bath was—Mrs.
Cole does not know how to shew her
kindness enough; and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any
body can.
And so she began inquiring after her directly, saying, ‘I
know you cannot have heard from Jane lately, because it is not her time
for writing;’ and when I immediately said, ‘But indeed we have, we had
a letter this very morning,’ I do not know that I ever saw any body
more surprized. ‘Have you, upon your honour?’ said she; ‘well, that is
quite unexpected.
Do let me hear what she says.’”

Emma’s politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smiling interest—

“Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately?
I
hope she is well?”

“Thank you.
Cole, and since she went away, I was reading it again to my
mother, for it is such a pleasure to her—a letter from Jane—that she
can never hear it often enough; so I knew it could not be far off, and
here it is, only just under my huswife—and since you are so kind as to
wish to hear what she says;—but, first of all, I really must, in
justice to Jane, apologise for her writing so short a letter—only two
pages you see—hardly two—and in general she fills the whole paper and
crosses half.
My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well.
And,
indeed, though my mother’s eyes are not so good as they were, she can
see amazingly well still, thank God! with the help of spectacles.
I am sure
there is nobody’s praise that could give us so much pleasure as Miss
Woodhouse’s.
My mother does not hear; she is a little deaf you know.
She was
pondering, in the meanwhile, upon the possibility, without seeming very
rude, of making her escape from Jane Fairfax’s letter, and had almost
resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse, when Miss
Bates turned to her again and seized her attention.

“My mother’s deafness is very trifling you see—just nothing at all.
Jane speaks so distinct!
However, she will not find her grandmama at
all deafer than she was two years ago; which is saying a great deal at
my mother’s time of life—and it really is full two years, you know,
since she was here.
So
very good of them to send her the whole way!
My
mother is so delighted!—for she is to be three months with us at least.
Three months, she says so, positively, as I am going to have the
pleasure of reading to you.
Dixon’s name as well as her own, to press their coming over directly,
and they would give them the meeting in Dublin, and take them back to
their country seat, Baly-craig, a beautiful place, I fancy.
Dixon, I mean—I do not know
that she ever heard about it from any body else; but it was very
natural, you know, that he should like to speak of his own place while
he was paying his addresses—and as Jane used to be very often walking
out with them—for Colonel and Mrs.
He is a most amiable, charming young man, I
believe.
Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland, from his account of
things.”

At this moment, an ingenious and animating suspicion entering Emma’s
brain with regard to Jane Fairfax, this charming Mr.
Dixon, you could hardly have expected her to be
excused from accompanying Colonel and Mrs.
The very thing that we have always been
rather afraid of; for we should not have liked to have her at such a
distance from us, for months together—not able to come if any thing was
to happen.
They want
her (Mr. and Mrs.
I think they judge wisely.
If Jane does not get well soon, we will call in Mr.
I merely called, because I would not
pass the door without inquiring after Mrs.
She regained
the street—happy in this, that though much had been forced on her
against her will, though she had in fact heard the whole substance of
Jane Fairfax’s letter, she had been able to escape the letter itself.
Bates’s youngest
daughter.
He was a married man, with only one living child, a
girl, about Jane’s age: and Jane became their guest, paying them long
visits and growing a favourite with all; and before she was nine years
old, his daughter’s great fondness for her, and his own wish of being a
real friend, united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of
undertaking the whole charge of her education.
She had fallen into good hands, known
nothing but kindness from the Campbells, and been given an excellent
education.
Her disposition and abilities were
equally worthy of all that friendship could do; and at eighteen or
nineteen she was, as far as such an early age can be qualified for the
care of children, fully competent to the office of instruction herself;
but she was too much beloved to be parted with.
As long as they lived, no
exertions would be necessary, their home might be hers for ever; and
for their own comfort they would have retained her wholly; but this
would be selfishness:—what must be at last, had better be soon.
Perhaps
they began to feel it might have been kinder and wiser to have resisted
the temptation of any delay, and spared her from a taste of such
enjoyments of ease and leisure as must now be relinquished.
She had never been quite well since
the time of their daughter’s marriage; and till she should have
completely recovered her usual strength, they must forbid her engaging
in duties, which, so far from being compatible with a weakened frame
and varying spirits, seemed, under the most favourable circumstances,
to require something more than human perfection of body and mind to be
discharged with tolerable comfort.
Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a
difficult question to answer; Mr.
But “she could never
get acquainted with her: she did not know how it was, but there was
such coldness and reserve—such apparent indifference whether she
pleased or not—and then, her aunt was such an eternal talker!—and she
was made such a fuss with by every body!—and it had been always
imagined that they were to be so intimate—because their ages were the
same, every body had supposed they must be so fond of each other.”
These were her reasons—she had no better.
Her eyes, a deep grey, with dark eye-lashes and
eyebrows, had never been denied their praise; but the skin, which she
had been used to cavil at, as wanting colour, had a clearness and
delicacy which really needed no fuller bloom.
They had music; Emma was obliged to play; and the
thanks and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an
affectation of candour, an air of greatness, meaning only to shew off
in higher style her own very superior performance.
Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness, she seemed
determined to hazard nothing.
She was disgustingly, was suspiciously
reserved.
There
probably _was_ something more to conceal than her own preference; Mr.
The like reserve prevailed on other topics.
She and Mr.
Churchill.
Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole; not so openly as he might
have done had her father been out of the room, but speaking plain
enough to be very intelligible to Emma.
Woodhouse had been
talked into what was necessary, told that he understood, and the papers
swept away;—“particularly pleasant.
There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are.
Woodhouse, in his
quiet way. “I had.
Once, I felt the fire rather too much; but then I
moved back my chair a little, a very little, and it did not disturb me.
I like old friends; and Miss Jane
Fairfax is a very pretty sort of young lady, a very pretty and a very
well-behaved young lady indeed.
Knightley, because she had Emma.”

“True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax.”

Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for the
present, said, and with a sincerity which no one could question—

“She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one’s eyes
from.
Mr.
Such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork!
Elton is going to be
married.”

Emma had not had time even to think of Mr.
Knightley, with a smile which implied a conviction of some part of what
had passed between them.

“But where could _you_ hear it?” cried Miss Bates. “Where could you
possibly hear it, Mr.
Knightley?
For it is not five minutes since I
received Mrs.
So I said I would go down
and see, and Jane said, ‘Shall I go down instead? for I think you have
a little cold, and Patty has been washing the kitchen.’—‘Oh! my dear,’
said I—well, and just then came the note.
A Miss Hawkins—that’s all I
know.
A Miss Hawkins of Bath.
A Miss Hawkins—”

“I was with Mr.
If ever there were people who, without having great wealth
themselves, had every thing they could wish for, I am sure it is us.
Elton going to be married!” said Emma, as soon as she could speak.
“He will have every body’s wishes for his happiness.”

“He is very young to settle,” was Mr.
This is great news, indeed.
Elton!—no wonder that you have such a
curiosity to see him.”

Jane’s curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly to
occupy her.

“No—I have never seen Mr.
Knightley ‘no;’ and Miss Bates and I that he is just the
happy medium.
When you have been here a little longer, Miss Fairfax,
you will understand that Mr.
His extreme attention to my mother—wanting her
to sit in the vicarage pew, that she might hear the better, for my
mother is a little deaf, you know—it is not much, but she does not hear
quite quick.
Perry.
Elton should have aspired—Miss
Woodhouse lets me chatter on, so good-humouredly.
Oh! those dear
little children.
Dixon, you say, is
not, strictly speaking, handsome?”

“Handsome!
Oh! no—far from it—certainly plain.
Mr.
It was to herself an amusing and a very welcome piece
of news, as proving that Mr.
If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way!—and upon its
beginning to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that the weather would be
detaining her at Mrs.
Miss Woodhouse, what do you think has happened!” which instantly burst
forth, had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation.
As the blow
was given, Emma felt that she could not now shew greater kindness than
in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly through what she had
to tell. “She had set out from Mrs.
I thought I should have
fainted.
I did not know what to do.
I was sitting near the
door—Elizabeth saw me directly; but he did not; he was busy with the
umbrella.
I am sure I
must have been as white as my gown.
Oh! dear, I thought it would have been the death of me!
So I
said, I was very much obliged to him: you know I could not do less; and
then he went back to Elizabeth, and I came round by the stables—I
believe I did—but I hardly knew where I was, or any thing about it.
Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, do
talk to me and make me comfortable again.”

Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in
her power.
She exerted herself, and did try to make her comfortable, by
considering all that had passed as a mere trifle, and quite unworthy of
being dwelt on,

“It might be distressing, for the moment,” said she; “but you seem to
have behaved extremely well; and it is over—and may never—can never, as
a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you need not think about
it.”

Harriet said, “very true,” and she “would not think about it;” but
still she talked of it—still she could talk of nothing else; and Emma,
at last, in order to put the Martins out of her head, was obliged to
hurry on the news, which she had meant to give with so much tender
caution; hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry, ashamed
or only amused, at such a state of mind in poor Harriet—such a
conclusion of Mr.
Elton’s importance with her!
Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting.
CHAPTER IV


Human nature is so well disposed towards those who are in interesting
situations, that a young person, who either marries or dies, is sure of
being kindly spoken of.
Mr.
He came back
gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring nothing for Miss
Woodhouse, and defying Miss Smith.
It would be almost beginning their life of civility
again.
Of the lady, individually, Emma thought very little.
Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for
Highbury—handsome enough—to look plain, probably, by Harriet’s side.
She was always having a glimpse of him
somewhere or other.
She was, moreover, perpetually
hearing about him; for, excepting when at Hartfield, she was always
among those who saw no fault in Mr.
Sometimes Mr.
Martin.
But Mr.
Elton, in person, had driven away all such cares.
Absolute neglect of the mother and sisters, when invited to come, would
be ingratitude.
It must not be: and yet the danger of a renewal of the
acquaintance—!
Philip Elton, White-Hart, Bath_, was to be seen under the operation of
being lifted into the butcher’s cart, which was to convey it to where
the coaches past; and every thing in this world, excepting that trunk
and the direction, was consequently a blank.
Martin and the two girls.
There were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot
by the window. _He_ had done it.
The style of the visit, and
the shortness of it, were then felt to be decisive.
They must be
separated; but there was a great deal of pain in the process—so much to
herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity of a little
consolation, and resolved on going home by way of Randalls to procure
it.
Her mind was quite sick of Mr.
The
refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary.
There was instant pleasure in the sight
of them, and still greater pleasure was conveyed in sound—for Mr.
Weston immediately accosted her with,

“How d’ye do?—how d’ye do?—We have been sitting with your father—glad
to see him so well.
Mr.
Weston’s faithful
pupil did not forget either at ten, or eleven, or twelve o’clock, that
she was to think of her at four.

“My dear, dear anxious friend,”—said she, in mental soliloquy, while
walking downstairs from her own room, “always overcareful for every
body’s comfort but your own; I see you now in all your little fidgets,
going again and again into his room, to be sure that all is right.” The
clock struck twelve as she passed through the hall. “’Tis twelve; I
shall not forget to think of you four hours hence; and by this time
to-morrow, perhaps, or a little later, I may be thinking of the
possibility of their all calling here.
She felt immediately that she
should like him; and there was a well-bred ease of manner, and a
readiness to talk, which convinced her that he came intending to be
acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon must be.
Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable; the
conviction was strengthened by what followed.
His manner
had no air of study or exaggeration.
His quick
eye she detected again and again glancing towards them with a happy
expression; and even, when he might have determined not to look, she
was confident that he was often listening.
She blessed the favouring blindness.
Frank Churchill’s accommodation on his journey, through the sad evils
of sleeping two nights on the road, and express very genuine unmixed
anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catching cold—which,
however, he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself till
after another night.
He had business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errands
for Mrs.
Weston at Ford’s, but he need not hurry any body else.” His
son, too well bred to hear the hint, rose immediately also, saying,

“As you are going farther on business, sir, I will take the opportunity
of paying a visit, which must be paid some day or other, and therefore
may as well be paid now.
I shall have no difficulty,
I suppose, in finding the house; though Fairfax, I believe, is not the
proper name—I should rather say Barnes, or Bates.
Do you know any
family of that name?”

“To be sure we do,” cried his father; “Mrs.
Do not defer it.
If you do not call early it will be a slight.”

The son looked convinced.

“I have heard her speak of the acquaintance,” said Emma; “she is a very
elegant young woman.”

He agreed to it, but with so quiet a “Yes,” as inclined her almost to
doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct sort
of elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could be thought
only ordinarily gifted with it.

“If you were never particularly struck by her manners before,” said
she, “I think you will to-day.
You will see her to advantage; see her
and hear her—no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all, for she has
an aunt who never holds her tongue.”

“You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are you?” said Mr.
Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as serious as he could,
and his father gave his hearty support by calling out, “My good friend,
this is quite unnecessary; Frank knows a puddle of water when he sees
it, and as to Mrs.
Bates’s, he may get there from the Crown in a hop,
step, and jump.”

They were permitted to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one, and a
graceful bow from the other, the two gentlemen took leave.
Emma
remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance, and
could now engage to think of them all at Randalls any hour of the day,
with full confidence in their comfort.
Frank Churchill again.
Weston, stood
for Hartfield; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction
with him.
He was delighted with every thing; admired
Hartfield sufficiently for Mr.
Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings.
He was immediately
interested.
They ought to have balls there at least every
fortnight through the winter.
He could not be
persuaded that so many good-looking houses as he saw around him, could
not furnish numbers enough for such a meeting; and even when
particulars were given and families described, he was still unwilling
to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixture would be any thing,
or that there would be the smallest difficulty in every body’s
returning into their proper place the next morning.
He could be no judge, however,
of the evil he was holding cheap.
As it was, I
was only betrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit.
But the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs.
Were you often in the same
society?”

At this moment they were approaching Ford’s, and he hastily exclaimed,
“Ha! this must be the very shop that every body attends every day of
their lives, as my father informs me.
I do admire your patriotism.
I assure you the utmost stretch of
public fame would not make me amends for the loss of any happiness in
private life.”

“I merely asked, whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax and her
party at Weymouth.”

“And now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be a
very unfair one.
I had known the Campbells a
little in town; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set.
Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man, and Mrs.
I have heard her every year of our lives since we both began.
We shall know more about them all, in half an hour, from you,
than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year.”

“Yes, Mr.
I could not excuse a man’s having more music than love—more ear
than eye—a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my feelings.
She must have felt the improper and dangerous
distinction.”

“As to that—I do not—”

“Oh! do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax’s
sensations from you, or from any body else.
Dixon, one may guess what one chuses.”

“There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all—” he
began rather quickly, but checking himself, added, “however, it is
impossible for me to say on what terms they really were—how it might
all be behind the scenes.
But we never did.
Weston laughed, and said he did not know what he was talking
about.
But Emma, in her own mind, determined that he _did_ know what he
was talking about, and that he shewed a very amiable inclination to
settle early in life, and to marry, from worthy motives.
Weston,
indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general; he became
liable to all these charges.
Mrs.
This was all very promising; and, but for
such an unfortunate fancy for having his hair cut, there was nothing to
denote him unworthy of the distinguished honour which her imagination
had given him; the honour, if not of being really in love with her, of
being at least very near it, and saved only by her own
indifference—(for still her resolution held of never marrying)—the
honour, in short, of being marked out for her by all their joint
acquaintance.
As Mrs.
Weston observed, “all young people would have their
little whims.”

There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not so
leniently disposed.
Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings, Mr. and Mrs.
She felt that she should like to have had the power of
refusal; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to be assembled
there, consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest to her,
occurred again and again, she did not know that she might not have been
tempted to accept.
Might not the evening end in a dance? had been a question of
his.
He was soon pretty well
resigned.

“I am not fond of dinner-visiting,” said he—“I never was.
No more is
Emma.
Late hours do not agree with us.
I am sorry Mr. and Mrs.
I think it would be much better if they would come
in one afternoon next summer, and take their tea with us—take us in
their afternoon walk; which they might do, as our hours are so
reasonable, and yet get home without being out in the damp of the
evening.
Knightley too, to
take care of her, I cannot wish to prevent it, provided the weather be
what it ought, neither damp, nor cold, nor windy.” Then turning to Mrs.
Weston must be quiet, and every thing deliberately
arranged.
Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking
as usual. “He should be happy to see Mrs.
Goddard.
Cole.”

“You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible.
We have
never been there above once since the new approach was made; but still
I have no doubt that James will take you very safely.
And when you get
there, you must tell him at what time you would have him come for you
again; and you had better name an early hour.
Cole
never touches malt liquor.
You would not think it to look at him, but
he is bilious—Mr.
Cole, you would stay a
little longer than you might wish.
You will not regard being tired.
Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not always folly.—It
depends upon the character of those who handle it.
He would either have gloried in the achievement, or been
ashamed of it.
Cole.
When
the Westons arrived, the kindest looks of love, the strongest of
admiration were for her, from both husband and wife; the son approached
her with a cheerful eagerness which marked her as his peculiar object,
and at dinner she found him seated by her—and, as she firmly believed,
not without some dexterity on his side.
Cox’s family,
the lawyer of Highbury.
Elton were talked over, Emma could
fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her
neighbour.
The first remote sound to which she felt herself obliged to
attend, was the name of Jane Fairfax.
Cole seemed to be relating
something of her that was expected to be very interesting.
That very dear part of
Emma, her fancy, received an amusing supply.
Cole was telling that
she had been calling on Miss Bates, and as soon as she entered the room
had been struck by the sight of a pianoforte—a very elegant looking
instrument—not a grand, but a large-sized square pianoforte; and the
substance of the story, the end of all the dialogue which ensued of
surprize, and inquiry, and congratulations on her side, and
explanations on Miss Bates’s, was, that this pianoforte had arrived
from Broadwood’s the day before, to the great astonishment of both aunt
and niece—entirely unexpected; that at first, by Miss Bates’s account,
Jane herself was quite at a loss, quite bewildered to think who could
possibly have ordered it—but now, they were both perfectly satisfied
that it could be from only one quarter;—of course it must be from
Colonel Campbell.

“One can suppose nothing else,” added Mrs.
Cole, “and I was only
surprized that there could ever have been a doubt.
Cole had many to agree with her; every body who spoke on the
subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell,
and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made; and there were
enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way, and still
listen to Mrs.
Cole, I
really was ashamed to look at our new grand pianoforte in the
drawing-room, while I do not know one note from another, and our little
girls, who are but just beginning, perhaps may never make any thing of
it; and there is poor Jane Fairfax, who is mistress of music, has not
any thing of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifullest old
spinet in the world, to amuse herself with.—I was saying this to Mr.
If Colonel Campbell is not the person, who can
be?”

“What do you say to Mrs.
Dixon?”

“Mrs.
Dixon! very true indeed.
Dixon.
Dixon, I dare
say.
Yes, I immediately perceive that it must be the
joint present of Mr. and Mrs.
Dixon.
As to the pretence of
trying her native air, I look upon that as a mere excuse.—In the summer
it might have passed; but what can any body’s native air do for them in
the months of January, February, and March?
He caught her.”

“He did.
They were called on to share in
the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses, and
obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others; but when the
table was again safely covered, when every corner dish was placed
exactly right, and occupation and ease were generally restored, Emma
said,

“The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me.
She
would not have been puzzled, had she dared fix on them.
Your reasonings
carry my judgment along with them entirely.
Dixon, I felt how much more probable that
it should be the tribute of warm female friendship.
And now I can see
it in no other light than as an offering of love.”

There was no occasion to press the matter farther.
She said no more, other
subjects took their turn; and the rest of the dinner passed away; the
dessert succeeded, the children came in, and were talked to and admired
amid the usual rate of conversation; a few clever things said, a few
downright silly, but by much the larger proportion neither the one nor
the other—nothing worse than everyday remarks, dull repetitions, old
news, and heavy jokes.
To be in company, nicely dressed herself and
seeing others nicely dressed, to sit and smile and look pretty, and say
nothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour.
In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her.
She was his object, and every body must perceive it.
She
introduced him to her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient moments
afterwards, heard what each thought of the other. “He had never seen so
lovely a face, and was delighted with her naïveté.” And she, “Only to
be sure it was paying him too great a compliment, but she did think
there were some looks a little like Mr.
She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury, taken at
its best, might reasonably please a young man who had more retirement
at home than he liked.
This had happened the year before. _Now_, he
said, he was beginning to have no longer the same wish.
A week to-morrow!—And I have hardly begun to enjoy myself.
But
just got acquainted with Mrs.
When Mr.
Weston.

“This is the luxury of a large party,” said she:—“one can get near
every body, and say every thing.
I have been making discoveries and forming plans, just like
yourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh.
I could
not bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr.
Such a very kind attention—and so thoughtful an
attention!—the sort of thing that so few men would think of.
And, in
short, from knowing his usual ways, I am very much inclined to think
that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all.
He is not a
gallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this, considering Jane
Fairfax’s ill-health, would appear a case of humanity to him;—and for
an act of unostentatious kindness, there is nobody whom I would fix on
more than on Mr.
I know he had horses to-day—for we arrived
together; and I laughed at him about it, but he said not a word that
could betray.”

“Well,” said Mrs.
Weston,
how could you think of such a thing?—Mr.
Knightley!—Mr.
I cannot at all consent to Mr.
I am
amazed that you should think of such a thing.”

“My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it.
And Jane Fairfax, too, of all women!”

“Nay, she has always been a first favourite with him, as you very well
know.”

“But the imprudence of such a match!”

“I am not speaking of its prudence; merely its probability.”

“I see no probability in it, unless you have any better foundation than
what you mention.
He has a great regard for
the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax—and is always glad
to shew them attention.
He does not care about Jane Fairfax.
Weston, laughing, “perhaps the greatest good he could
do them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home.”

“If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself; a
very shameful and degrading connexion.
You divert me against my
conscience.
Little things do not irritate him.
She
might talk on; and if he wanted to say any thing himself, he would only
talk louder, and drown her voice.
But the question is not, whether it
would be a bad connexion for him, but whether he wishes it; and I think
he does.
I have
heard him express himself so warmly on those points!—Such an admirer of
her performance on the pianoforte, and of her voice!
I have heard him
say that he could listen to her for ever.
Knightley does
nothing mysteriously.”

“I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly;
oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common
course of things, occur to him.”

“Very well; and if he had intended to give her one, he would have told
her so.”

“There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma.
I have a very
strong notion that it comes from him.
Cole told us of it at dinner.”

“You take up an idea, Mrs.
Frank Churchill sang again.
They had sung together once or twice, it appeared, at Weymouth.
Her objections to Mr.
She could see
nothing but evil in it.
It would be a great disappointment to Mr.
A real injury to the children—a
most mortifying change, and material loss to them all;—a very great
deduction from her father’s daily comfort—and, as to herself, she could
not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey.
Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell.
Presently Mr.
Knightley looked back, and came and sat down by her.
As a sort of touchstone, however, she began to speak of his
kindness in conveying the aunt and niece; and though his answer was in
the spirit of cutting the matter short, she believed it to indicate
only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness of his own.

“I often feel concern,” said she, “that I dare not make our carriage
more useful on such occasions.
Cole,
that every thing was rapidly clearing away, to give proper space.
Knightley.
Cole—he was looking on unconcerned; Jane was asked by somebody
else, and he was still talking to Mrs.
They were a couple worth looking at.
Two dances, unfortunately, were all that could be allowed.
Weston, look sorrowful,
and have done.

“Perhaps it is as well,” said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emma to
her carriage. “I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancing
would not have agreed with me, after yours.”




CHAPTER IX


Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles.
She was then interrupted by Harriet’s coming in; and if Harriet’s
praise could have satisfied her, she might soon have been comforted.

“Oh! if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!”

“Don’t class us together, Harriet.
Every body
last night said how well you played.”

“Those who knew any thing about it, must have felt the difference.
Nobody talked about it.
Besides, if she does play so very well, you
know, it is no more than she is obliged to do, because she will have to
teach.
How did you think the Coxes looked?”

“Just as they always do—very vulgar.”

“They told me something,” said Harriet rather hesitatingly; “but it is
nothing of any consequence.”

Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her, though fearful of its
producing Mr.
He sat by her
at dinner.
Perry walking hastily by, Mr.
William Cox letting himself in at the
office-door, Mr.
She looked down the Randalls road.
Weston and her son-in-law; they were walking into
Highbury;—to Hartfield of course.
They would be very much pleased.”

“Me!
Miss Woodhouse looks as if she did not want me.
Weston and hear the instrument.”

“Well—if you advise it.—But (with a smile) if Colonel Campbell should
have employed a careless friend, and if it should prove to have an
indifferent tone—what shall I say?
I shall be no support to Mrs.
We
will follow them to Hartfield.
Bates’s door.
Emma watched them in,
and then joined Harriet at the interesting counter,—trying, with all
the force of her own mind, to convince her that if she wanted plain
muslin it was of no use to look at figured; and that a blue ribbon, be
it ever so beautiful, would still never match her yellow pattern.
You could make it into two parcels,
Mrs.
Ford, could not you?”

“It is not worth while, Harriet, to give Mrs.
Ford the trouble of two
parcels.”

“No more it is.”

“No trouble in the world, ma’am,” said the obliging Mrs.
Ford.

“Oh! but indeed I would much rather have it only in one.
Then, if you
please, you shall send it all to Mrs.
Goddard’s—I do not know—No, I
think, Miss Woodhouse, I may just as well have it sent to Hartfield,
and take it home with me at night.
What do you advise?”

“That you do not give another half-second to the subject.
Ford.”

“Aye, that will be much best,” said Harriet, quite satisfied, “I should
not at all like to have it sent to Mrs.
How
do you do, Miss Smith?—Very well I thank you.—And I begged Mrs.
Woodhouse?—I am so glad
to hear such a good account.
Oh,
said I, Patty do not come with your bad news to me.
Then the baked apples came home,
Mrs.
Only three of us.—besides dear Jane at present—and she really
eats nothing—makes such a shocking breakfast, you would be quite
frightened if you saw it.
I believe it
is the only way that Mr.
We have apple-dumplings, however, very often.
Well, Mrs.
Weston, you have prevailed, I
hope, and these ladies will oblige us.”

Emma would be “very happy to wait on Mrs.
I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbons from town.
Jane
came back delighted yesterday.
Thank ye, the gloves do very well—only a
little too large about the wrist; but Jane is taking them in.”

“What was I talking of?” said she, beginning again when they were all
in the street.
William Larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this
year.
I will send you some more, before they get good for nothing.’ So
I begged he would not—for really as to ours being gone, I could not
absolutely say that we had a great many left—it was but half a dozen
indeed; but they should be all kept for Jane; and I could not at all
bear that he should be sending us more, so liberal as he had been
already; and Jane said the same.
But, however, I found
afterwards from Patty, that William said it was all the apples of
_that_ sort his master had; he had brought them all—and now his master
had not one left to bake or boil.
She could not bear that her master should not be able to have
another apple-tart this spring.
Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes, and as long as so many sacks were
sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder.
Miss
Smith, the step at the turning.”




CHAPTER X


The appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered, was
tranquillity itself; Mrs.
Bates, deprived of her usual employment,
slumbering on one side of the fire, Frank Churchill, at a table near
her, most deedily occupied about her spectacles, and Jane Fairfax,
standing with her back to them, intent on her pianoforte.
Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet able to shew a most
happy countenance on seeing Emma again.

“This is a pleasure,” said he, in rather a low voice, “coming at least
ten minutes earlier than I had calculated.
Do not
you think so?”

Jane did not look round.
Mrs.
I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this
rivet quite firm.
Bates,) of restoring your spectacles,
healed for the present.”

He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter; to escape a
little from the latter, he went to the pianoforte, and begged Miss
Fairfax, who was still sitting at it, to play something more.

“If you are very kind,” said he, “it will be one of the waltzes we
danced last night;—let me live them over again.
I believe you were glad we
danced no longer; but I would have given worlds—all the worlds one ever
has to give—for another half-hour.”

She played.

“What felicity it is to hear a tune again which _has_ made one
happy!—If I mistake not that was danced at Weymouth.”

She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and played
something else.
He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte,
and turning to Emma, said,

“Here is something quite new to me.
Nothing hastily done; nothing
incomplete.
True affection only could have prompted it.”

Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not help being amused;
and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the
remains of a smile, when she saw that with all the deep blush of
consciousness, there had been a smile of secret delight, she had less
scruple in the amusement, and much less compunction with respect to
her.—This amiable, upright, perfect Jane Fairfax was apparently
cherishing very reprehensible feelings.
He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over together.—Emma
took the opportunity of whispering,

“You speak too plain.
She is playing _Robin_ _Adair_ at this
moment—_his_ favourite.”

Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the window, descried Mr.
Knightley on horse-back not far off.

“Mr.
Knightley I declare!—I must speak to him if possible, just to
thank him.
Tell me how Miss Fairfax is.”

And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear
her in any thing else.
But Emma still shook her head in
steady scepticism.

“So obliged to you!—so very much obliged to you for the carriage,”
resumed Miss Bates.
He cut her short with,

“I am going to Kingston.
Can I do any thing for you?”

“Oh! dear, Kingston—are you?—Mrs.
Do put up your horse at the Crown, and come in.”

“Well,” said he, in a deliberating manner, “for five minutes, perhaps.”

“And here is Mrs.
Mr.
Frank Churchill; I never saw any
thing equal to it.”

“Oh! very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose Miss
Woodhouse and Mr.
Frank Churchill are hearing every thing that passes.
I think Miss Fairfax dances very well; and Mrs.
Weston is the very best country-dance player, without exception, in
England.
William Larkins mentioned it here.
You
should not have done it, indeed you should not.
He asked me if he could do any thing....”

“Yes,” said Jane, “we heard his kind offers, we heard every thing.”

“Oh! yes, my dear, I dare say you might, because you know, the door was
open, and the window was open, and Mr.
CHAPTER XI


It may be possible to do without dancing entirely.
Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and longed to dance again;
and the last half-hour of an evening which Mr.
Weston could say of their exactly equal size,
that it was a little the largest.
Cole’s
should be finished there—that the same party should be collected, and
the same musician engaged, met with the readiest acquiescence.
Mr.
You and Miss Smith, and
Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two Miss Coxes five; and for five
couple there will be plenty of room.”

But soon it came to be on one side,

“But will there be good room for five couple?—I really do not think
there will.”

On another,

“And after all, five couple are not enough to make it worth while to
stand up.
Five couple are nothing, when one thinks seriously about it.
It will not do to _invite_ five couple.
A word was
put in for a second young Cox; and at last, Mr.
The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other. “Might not
they use both rooms, and dance across the passage?” It seemed the best
scheme; and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a
better.
So would poor little Harriet.
Pray do
not let them talk of it.
He has been opening the doors very often this evening, and
keeping them open very inconsiderately.
I do not mean to set you against him, but indeed he is not
quite the thing!”

Mrs.
Ten
couple may stand here very well.”

Emma demurred. “It would be a crowd—a sad crowd; and what could be
worse than dancing without space to turn in?”

“Very true,” he gravely replied; “it was very bad.” But still he went
on measuring, and still he ended with,

“I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple.”

“No, no,” said she, “you are quite unreasonable.
Nothing can be farther from pleasure than to
be dancing in a crowd—and a crowd in a little room!”

“There is no denying it,” he replied. “I agree with you exactly.
Before the middle of the next day, he was at Hartfield; and he entered
the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance of
the scheme.
I bring a new proposal on the subject:—a
thought of my father’s, which waits only your approbation to be acted
upon.
May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances
of this little projected ball, to be given, not at Randalls, but at the
Crown Inn?”

“The Crown!”

“Yes; if you and Mr.
Woodhouse see no objection, and I trust you
cannot, my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him
there.
This is what we all
feel.
Oh! you were perfectly right!
If they must dance, they
had better dance at Randalls.
They would catch worse colds at the Crown than
anywhere.”

“I was going to observe, sir,” said Frank Churchill, “that one of the
great recommendations of this change would be the very little danger of
any body’s catching cold—so much less danger at the Crown than at
Randalls!
Mr.
Weston (poor Miss Taylor that was) would suffer
it.”

“Ah! sir—but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind a
window-curtain, and throw up a sash, without its being suspected.
However,
this does make a difference; and, perhaps, when we come to talk it
over—but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration.
One
cannot resolve upon them in a hurry.
Weston will be so
obliging as to call here one morning, we may talk it over, and see what
can be done.”

“But, unfortunately, sir, my time is so limited—”

“Oh!” interrupted Emma, “there will be plenty of time for talking every
thing over.
Weston undertakes to direct the whole.”

“There, papa!—Now you must be satisfied—Our own dear Mrs.
Weston, who
is carefulness itself.
Perry said, so many
years ago, when I had the measles? ‘If _Miss_ _Taylor_ undertakes to
wrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any fears, sir.’ How often have I
heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her!”

“Aye, very true.
You were very bad with the measles; that is, you would
have been very bad, but for Perry’s great attention.
Look! in places
you see it is dreadfully dirty; and the wainscot is more yellow and
forlorn than any thing I could have imagined.”

“My dear, you are too particular,” said her husband. “What does all
that signify?
It
regarded a supper-room.
At the time of the ballroom’s being built,
suppers had not been in question; and a small card-room adjoining, was
the only addition.
This card-room would be wanted
as a card-room now; or, if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by
their four selves, still was it not too small for any comfortable
supper?
To do what would be most generally
pleasing must be our object—if one could but tell what that would be.”

“Yes, very true,” cried Frank, “very true.
Suppose I go and invite Miss Bates to join us?”

“Well—if you please,” said Mrs.
Weston rather hesitating, “if you think
she will be of any use.”

“You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates,” said Emma. “She
will be all delight and gratitude, but she will tell you nothing.
Weston joined them, and on hearing what was proposed, gave it
his decided approbation.

“Aye, do, Frank.—Go and fetch Miss Bates, and let us end the matter at
once.
Invite them both.”

“Both sir!
I did not immediately recollect.
Undoubtedly if you wish it, I will endeavour to persuade them both.”
And away he ran.
Weston, like a sweet-tempered woman
and a good wife, had examined the passage again, and found the evils of
it much less than she had supposed before—indeed very trifling; and
here ended the difficulties of decision.
All the minor arrangements of table and
chair, lights and music, tea and supper, made themselves; or were left
as mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs.
Weston and Mrs.
Stokes.—Every body invited, was certainly to come; Frank had already
written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight,
which could not possibly be refused.
The preparations must take
their time, nothing could be properly ready till the third week were
entered on, and for a few days they must be planning, proceeding and
hoping in uncertainty—at the risk—in her opinion, the great risk, of
its being all in vain.
Knightley’s provoking
indifference about it.
It was
not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so indifferent,
or so indignant; he was not guided by _her_ feelings in reprobating the
ball, for _she_ enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree.
What a disappointment it would be!
Two
days of joyful security were immediately followed by the over-throw of
every thing.
The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma, in a note from Mrs.
Weston, instantly.
He knew her illnesses; they never occurred
but for her own convenience.
When once it had
been read, there was no doing any thing, but lament and exclaim.
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared; but if
this reflected at all upon his impatience, his sorrowful look and total
want of spirits when he did come might redeem him.
His dejection was most evident.
He
sat really lost in thought for the first few minutes; and when rousing
himself, it was only to say,

“Of all horrid things, leave-taking is the worst.”

“But you will come again,” said Emma. “This will not be your only visit
to Randalls.”

“Ah!—(shaking his head)—the uncertainty of when I may be able to
return!—I shall try for it with a zeal!—It will be the object of all my
thoughts and cares!—and if my uncle and aunt go to town this spring—but
I am afraid—they did not stir last spring—I am afraid it is a custom
gone for ever.”

“Our poor ball must be quite given up.”

“Ah! that ball!—why did we wait for any thing?—why not seize the
pleasure at once?—How often is happiness destroyed by preparation,
foolish preparation!—You told us it would be so.—Oh!
I am sure
you did not much expect to like us.
Miss Bates’s powerful, argumentative mind might
have strengthened yours.”

“Yes—I _have_ called there; passing the door, I thought it better.
She was out; and I felt it impossible not
to wait till she came in.
She heard
him sigh.
It was natural for him to feel that he had _cause_ to sigh.
He could not believe her to be encouraging him.
A very few minutes more, however, completed the present trial.
Mr.
Weston, always alert when business was to be done, and as incapable of
procrastinating any evil that was inevitable, as of foreseeing any that
was doubtful, said, “It was time to go;” and the young man, though he
might and did sigh, could not but agree, to take leave.

“I shall hear about you all,” said he; “that is my chief consolation.
Weston to correspond with me.
Short had
been the notice—short their meeting; he was gone; and Emma felt so
sorry to part, and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from
his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry, and feeling it
too much.
It was a sad change.
Knightley will be happy.
But, on the other hand, she could
not admit herself to be unhappy, nor, after the first morning, to be
less disposed for employment than usual; she was still busy and
cheerful; and, pleasing as he was, she could yet imagine him to have
faults; and farther, though thinking of him so much, and, as she sat
drawing or working, forming a thousand amusing schemes for the progress
and close of their attachment, fancying interesting dialogues, and
inventing elegant letters; the conclusion of every imaginary
declaration on his side was that she _refused_ _him_.
Their affection
was always to subside into friendship.
Every thing tender and charming
was to mark their parting; but still they were to part.
I am quite enough in love.
Weston arrived, Emma had the perusal of it; and
she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made her at
first shake her head over her own sensations, and think she had
undervalued their strength.
Compressed into the very lowest vacant corner were these
words—“I had not a spare moment on Tuesday, as you know, for Miss
Woodhouse’s beautiful little friend.
His information and prospects
as to Enscombe were neither worse nor better than had been anticipated;
Mrs.
Churchill was recovering, and he dared not yet, even in his own
imagination, fix a time for coming to Randalls again.
Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter in the material
part, its sentiments, she yet found, when it was folded up and returned
to Mrs.
But stranger things have
happened; and when we cease to care for each other as we do now, it
will be the means of confirming us in that sort of true disinterested
friendship which I can already look forward to with pleasure.”

It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet’s behalf, though it
might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom; for evil in that
quarter was at hand.
He would soon be among
them again; Mr.
There was hardly time to talk over
the first letter from Enscombe before “Mr.
Elton; and Harriet’s mind, she had been willing to hope, had been
lately gaining strength.
Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all the
reasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that Emma could
give.
It
was all my doing, I know.
Do not imagine me in danger of
forgetting it.”

Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words of eager
exclamation.
Emma continued,

“I have not said, exert yourself Harriet for my sake; think less, talk
less of Mr.
Dear Harriet!—I would not change
you for the clearest-headed, longest-sighted, best-judging female
breathing.
I
mention no names; but happy the man who changes Emma for Harriet!”




CHAPTER XIV


Mrs.
A thousand vexatious thoughts
would recur.
The
visit was of course short; and there was so much embarrassment and
occupation of mind to shorten it, that Emma would not allow herself
entirely to form an opinion of the lady, and on no account to give one,
beyond the nothing-meaning terms of being “elegantly dressed, and very
pleasing.”

She did not really like her.
Emma
thought at least it would turn out so.
Elton was in being in the same room at once with the woman he had just
married, the woman he had wanted to marry, and the woman whom he had
been expected to marry, she must allow him to have the right to look as
little wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as little really easy as
could be.

“Well, Miss Woodhouse,” said Harriet, when they had quitted the house,
and after waiting in vain for her friend to begin; “Well, Miss
Woodhouse, (with a gentle sigh,) what do you think of her?—Is not she
very charming?”

There was a little hesitation in Emma’s answer.

“Oh! yes—very—a very pleasing young woman.”

“I think her beautiful, quite beautiful.”

“Very nicely dressed, indeed; a remarkably elegant gown.”

“I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love.”

“Oh! no—there is nothing to surprize one at all.—A pretty fortune; and
she came in his way.”

“I dare say,” returned Harriet, sighing again, “I dare say she was very
much attached to him.”

“Perhaps she might; but it is not every man’s fate to marry the woman
who loves him best.
Happy creature!
Harriet would have been a better match.
If not wise or refined herself,
she would have connected him with those who were; but Miss Hawkins, it
might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit, had been the best of
her own set.
Suckling’s seat;”—a comparison of Hartfield to Maple Grove.
The
grounds of Hartfield were small, but neat and pretty; and the house was
modern and well-built.
A charming place, undoubtedly.
Elton, who only wanted to be talking herself.

“So extremely like Maple Grove!
Surry is full of beauties.”

“Oh! yes, I am quite aware of that.
We explored
to King’s-Weston twice last summer, in that way, most delightfully,
just after their first having the barouche-landau.
You have many
parties of that kind here, I suppose, Miss Woodhouse, every summer?”

“No; not immediately here.
Nobody can
be more devoted to home than I am.
I was quite a proverb for it at
Maple Grove.
I
think, on the contrary, when people shut themselves up entirely from
society, it is a very bad thing; and that it is much more advisable to
mix in the world in a proper degree, without living in it either too
much or too little.
It would be a charming introduction for you, who have lived
so secluded a life; and I could immediately secure you some of the best
society in the place.
I
honestly said as much to Mr.
When he was speaking of it in that way, I honestly said that _the_
_world_ I could give up—parties, balls, plays—for I had no fear of
retirement.
Blessed with so many resources within myself, the world was
not necessary to _me_.
To those who
had no resources it was a different thing; but my resources made me
quite independent.
Certainly I had been accustomed
to every luxury at Maple Grove; but I did assure him that two carriages
were not necessary to my happiness, nor were spacious apartments.
‘But,’ said I, ‘to be quite honest, I do not think I can live without
something of a musical society.
Elton would hesitate
to assure you of there being a _very_ musical society in Highbury; and
I hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more than may be
pardoned, in consideration of the motive.”

“No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head.
I think, Miss Woodhouse, you and I must establish a
musical club, and have regular weekly meetings at your house, or ours.
If _we_ exert ourselves, I think we shall
not be long in want of allies.
They are but too apt to give up music.”

“But you, who are so extremely fond of it—there can be no danger,
surely?”

“I should hope not; but really when I look around among my
acquaintance, I tremble.
Selina has entirely given up music—never
touches the instrument—though she played sweetly.
Bird and Mrs.
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright.
Mr.
Their propriety, simplicity, and elegance, would make them the safest
model for any young woman.”

“And who do you think came in while we were there?”

Emma was quite at a loss.
They were off; and Emma could
breathe.

“Insufferable woman!” was her immediate exclamation. “Worse than I had
supposed.
Absolutely insufferable!
Actually to discover that Mr.
And to propose that she and I should unite to
form a musical club!
I never met with her equal.
Much beyond
my hopes.
Oh! what would Frank
Churchill say to her, if he were here?
How angry and how diverted he
would be!
Ah! there I am—thinking of him directly.
She speaks a little too quick.
But I believe I
am nice; I do not like strange voices; and nobody speaks like you and
poor Miss Taylor.
However, she seems a very obliging, pretty-behaved
young lady, and no doubt will make him a very good wife.
Mr.
CHAPTER XV


Emma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill
opinion of Mrs.
Elton’s
praise passed from one mouth to another as it ought to do, unimpeded by
Miss Woodhouse, who readily continued her first contribution and talked
with a good grace of her being “very pleasant and very elegantly
dressed.”

In one respect Mrs.
Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at
first.
Her feelings altered towards Emma.—Offended, probably, by the
little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with, she drew
back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant; and
though the effect was agreeable, the ill-will which produced it was
necessarily increasing Emma’s dislike.
Emma hoped it must rapidly work Harriet’s cure; but the
sensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very
much.—It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet’s attachment had been
an offering to conjugal unreserve, and her own share in the story,
under a colouring the least favourable to her and the most soothing to
him, had in all likelihood been given also.
She was, of course, the
object of their joint dislike.—When they had nothing else to say, it
must be always easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse; and the enmity
which they dared not shew in open disrespect to her, found a broader
vent in contemptuous treatment of Harriet.
Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax; and from the first.
I do not scruple to say that she plays extremely
well.
Campbell, I
have no idea that you will suppose her talents can be unknown.”

“Oh! but dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in such retirement, such
obscurity, so thrown away.—Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed
with the Campbells are so palpably at an end!
And I think she feels it.
One can see that she
feels the want of encouragement.
I like her the better for it.
I must
confess it is a recommendation to me.
Oh!
I am sure they will like her
extremely; and when she gets a little acquainted with them, her fears
will completely wear off, for there really is nothing in the manners of
either but what is highly conciliating.—I shall have her very often
indeed while they are with me, and I dare say we shall sometimes find a
seat for her in the barouche-landau in some of our exploring parties.”

“Poor Jane Fairfax!”—thought Emma.—“You have not deserved this.
Dixon, but this is a punishment
beyond what you can have merited!—The kindness and protection of Mrs.
Let me not suppose
that she dares go about, Emma Woodhouse-ing me!—But upon my honour,
there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman’s tongue!”

Emma had not to listen to such paradings again—to any so exclusively
addressed to herself—so disgustingly decorated with a “dear Miss
Woodhouse.” The change on Mrs.
Elton’s guidance, the very active
patroness of Jane Fairfax, and only sharing with others in a general
way, in knowing what was felt, what was meditated, what was done.
Emma’s only
surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and
tolerate Mrs.
This was astonishing!—She could not have believed it possible that the
taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax could endure such society and
friendship as the Vicarage had to offer.

“She is a riddle, quite a riddle!” said she.—“To chuse to remain here
month after month, under privations of every sort!
And now to chuse the
mortification of Mrs.
Elton’s notice and the penury of her
conversation, rather than return to the superior companions who have
always loved her with such real, generous affection.”

Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three months; the Campbells
were gone to Ireland for three months; but now the Campbells had
promised their daughter to stay at least till Midsummer, and fresh
invitations had arrived for her to join them there.
Dixon had written most pressingly.
Elton.
But (with a reproachful smile at Emma) she receives attentions
from Mrs.
Elton, which nobody else pays her.”

Emma felt that Mrs.
Mrs.
Elton does not
talk _to_ Miss Fairfax as she speaks _of_ her.
We all know the
difference between the pronouns he or she and thou, the plainest spoken
amongst us; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common
civility in our personal intercourse with each other—a something more
early implanted.
We cannot give any body the disagreeable hints that we
may have been very full of the hour before.
Elton by her superiority both of mind
and manner; and that, face to face, Mrs.
Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probably
never fell in Mrs.
Elton’s way before—and no degree of vanity can
prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action, if
not in consciousness.”

“I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax,” said Emma.
The extent of your admiration may take you by surprize some day or
other.”

Mr.
One says those sort of things, of course, without
any idea of a serious meaning.
She has
not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife.”

Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault. “Well,” said
she, “and you soon silenced Mr.
He gave me a quiet hint; I told him he was mistaken;
he asked my pardon and said no more.
Mrs.
No—till Cole alluded to my
supposed attachment, it had never entered my head.
Perry, Mrs.
In the course of the
spring she must return their civilities by one very superior party—in
which her card-tables should be set out with their separate candles and
unbroken packs in the true style—and more waiters engaged for the
evening than their own establishment could furnish, to carry round the
refreshments at exactly the proper hour, and in the proper order.
A dinner there must be.
Knightley’s words dwelt with her.
Elton which nobody else paid her.

“This is very true,” said she, “at least as far as relates to me, which
was all that was meant—and it is very shameful.—Of the same age—and
always knowing her—I ought to have been more her friend.—She will never
like me now.
They were all disengaged and all
happy.—The preparatory interest of this dinner, however, was not yet
over.
A circumstance rather unlucky occurred.
The two eldest little
Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some
weeks in the spring, and their papa now proposed bringing them, and
staying one whole day at Hartfield—which one day would be the very day
of this party.—His professional engagements did not allow of his being
put off, but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening
so.
Woodhouse than to Emma.
The day came, the party were punctually assembled, and Mr.
John
Knightley seemed early to devote himself to the business of being
agreeable.
Elton, as
elegant as lace and pearls could make her, he looked at in
silence—wanting only to observe enough for Isabella’s information—but
Miss Fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could
talk to her.
It
was natural to have some civil hopes on the subject, and he said,

“I hope you did not venture far, Miss Fairfax, this morning, or I am
sure you must have been wet.—We scarcely got home in time.
I always fetch the letters
when I am here.
I know Mr.
I consider one as including the other.
Time
will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within the
daily circle—but that is not the change I had in view for you.
As an
old friend, you will allow me to hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten years
hence you may have as many concentrated objects as I have.”

It was kindly said, and very far from giving offence.
Woodhouse, who being, according to his custom on
such occasions, making the circle of his guests, and paying his
particular compliments to the ladies, was ending with her—and with all
his mildest urbanity, said,

“I am very sorry to hear, Miss Fairfax, of your being out this morning
in the rain.
I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour.
Weston kindly and persuasively, “I certainly do
feel tempted to give.
Better wait an hour or two, or even
half a day for your letters, than run the risk of bringing on your
cough again.
Yes, I am sure you are
much too reasonable.
You look as if you would not do such a thing
again.”

“Oh! she _shall_ _not_ do such a thing again,” eagerly rejoined Mrs.
But I do flatter
myself, my dear Jane, that my influence is not entirely worn out.
John Knightley.

“The post-office is a wonderful establishment!” said she.—“The
regularity and despatch of it!
If one thinks of all that it has to do,
and all that it does so well, it is really astonishing!”

“It is certainly very well regulated.”

“So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears!
If you want any farther
explanation,” continued he, smiling, “they are paid for it.
The public pays and must be served
well.”

The varieties of handwriting were farther talked of, and the usual
observations made.

“I have heard it asserted,” said John Knightley, “that the same sort of
handwriting often prevails in a family; and where the same master
teaches, it is natural enough.
Isabella and Emma, I think, do write very much alike.
I have a note of his.—Do not you
remember, Mrs.
Weston, employing him to write for you one day?”

“He chose to say he was employed”—

“Well, well, I have that note; and can shew it after dinner to convince
Mr.
Knightley.”

“Oh! when a gallant young man, like Mr.
Frank Churchill,” said Mr.
She had heard and seen it all; and felt some curiosity to know whether
the wet walk of this morning had produced any.
Weston were obliged to be
almost always either talking together or silent together.
Mrs.
If Jane repressed her for a little time, she soon
began again; and though much that passed between them was in a
half-whisper, especially on Mrs.
Suckling, Mrs.
Wax-candles in the schoolroom!
You may imagine how desirable!
Bragge’s is the one I would most wish
to see you in.”

“Colonel and Mrs.
Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer,” said
Jane. “I must spend some time with them; I am sure they will want
it;—afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself.
I shall write to Mrs.
Suckling was always rather a friend
to the abolition.”

“I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade,” replied Jane;
“governess-trade, I assure you, was all that I had in view; widely
different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on; but as to
the greater misery of the victims, I do not know where it lies.
Elton gaily,
“in resolving to be always on the watch, and employing my friends to
watch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us.”

In this style she ran on; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till
Mr.
I fancy I am
rather a favourite; he took notice of my gown.
Do you think it will
look well?”

The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room when Mr.
Woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now, as he would have been
sorry to see him before.
John Knightley only was in mute
astonishment.—That a man who might have spent his evening quietly at
home after a day of business in London, should set off again, and walk
half a mile to another man’s house, for the sake of being in mixed
company till bed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of civility
and the noise of numbers, was a circumstance to strike him deeply.
This is precisely what I wanted.
Her looks and
words had nothing to restrain them.
She was happy, she knew she was
happy, and knew she ought to be happy.
Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too communicative
to want others to talk, was very well satisfied with what she did say,
and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial
communication of what the whole room must have overheard already.
Elton, and her attention disengaged, he necessarily began on the
subject with her.
I
hardly ever get a letter.”

“And so you absolutely opened what was directed to her!
Suckling, sometimes flies about.
Bragge went to London and back again with four
horses.”

“The evil of the distance from Enscombe,” said Mr.
I always take the part of my
own sex.
I give you notice—You will find me a formidable
antagonist on that point.
She always travels with her own sheets;
an excellent precaution.
Churchill does every thing that any other fine
lady ever did.
Mrs.
Mr.
Do not run away with such an idea.”

“Is not she?
Then she is no rule for Mrs.
The fact is, I suppose, that she is tired of Enscombe.
Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina to enjoy
that sort of seclusion.
Weston’s letters lately have
been full of very little else than Mrs.
Elton.”

He had done his duty and could return to his son.

“When Frank left us,” continued he, “it was quite uncertain when we
might see him again, which makes this day’s news doubly welcome.
Elton, in the course of my life, that if
things are going untowardly one month, they are sure to mend the next.”

“Very true, Mr.
It is just what I used to say
to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship, when,
because things did not go quite right, did not proceed with all the
rapidity which suited his feelings, he was apt to be in despair, and
exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be _May_ before Hymen’s
saffron robe would be put on for us.
Churchill is
ordered, or has ordered herself, to spend in some warmer place than
Enscombe—in short, to spend in London; so that we have the agreeable
prospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring—precisely the
season of the year which one should have chosen for it: days almost at
the longest; weather genial and pleasant, always inviting one out, and
never too hot for exercise.
Elton, whether the uncertainty of our meetings, the
sort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to-day or
to-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more friendly to happiness than
having him actually in the house.
Weston, I have very little doubt that my opinion
will be decidedly in his favour.
I give you notice that as I find your son,
so I shall judge of him.—I am no flatterer.”

Mr.
Churchill.
She was the instigator.
Churchill has
pride; but his pride is nothing to his wife’s: his is a quiet,
indolent, gentlemanlike sort of pride that would harm nobody, and only
make himself a little helpless and tiresome; but her pride is arrogance
and insolence!
And what inclines one less to bear, she has no fair
pretence of family or blood.
People of the name of Tupman, very lately settled there, and
encumbered with many low connexions, but giving themselves immense
airs, and expecting to be on a footing with the old established
families.
Weston.
One has not great hopes from Birmingham.
It is infinitely too bad.
Tea was carrying round, and Mr.
Elton sat down with Mr.
Knightley seemed
little disposed for conversation; Mrs.
Witness this very time.
The difference which Randalls, Randalls alone makes in
your goings-on, is very great.”

“Yes,” said his brother quickly, “it is Randalls that does it all.”

“Very well—and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely to have less
influence than heretofore, it strikes me as a possible thing, Emma,
that Henry and John may be sometimes in the way.
And if they are, I
only beg you to send them home.”

“No,” cried Mr.
I shall certainly be at leisure.”

“Upon my word,” exclaimed Emma, “you amuse me!
These amazing engagements of mine—what
have they been?
Dining once with the Coles—and having a ball talked of,
which never took place.
I can understand you—(nodding at Mr.
And as to my dear little boys, I must say, that
if Aunt Emma has not time for them, I do not think they would fare much
better with Uncle Knightley, who is absent from home about five hours
where she is absent one—and who, when he is at home, is either reading
to himself or settling his accounts.”

Mr.
Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile; and succeeded without
difficulty, upon Mrs.
Elton’s beginning to talk to him.
She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration.
That would be so very painful a conclusion of their present
acquaintance! and yet, she could not help rather anticipating something
decisive.
She felt as if the spring would not pass without bringing a
crisis, an event, a something to alter her present composed and
tranquil state.
Lively as he
was, it seemed a liveliness that did not satisfy himself; but what
decided her belief on the subject, was his staying only a quarter of an
hour, and hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury. “He had seen a
group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed—he had not
stopped, he would not stop for more than a word—but he had the vanity
to think they would be disappointed if he did not call, and much as he
wished to stay longer at Hartfield, he must hurry off.” She had no
doubt as to his being less in love—but neither his agitated spirits,
nor his hurrying away, seemed like a perfect cure; and she was rather
inclined to think it implied a dread of her returning power, and a
discreet resolution of not trusting himself with her long.
This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days.
He was often hoping, intending to come—but was always prevented.
His
aunt could not bear to have him leave her.
She could not
endure its noise.
They were going to remove immediately to
Richmond.
She was told that now he wrote with
the greatest confidence of being often with them, almost as often as he
could even wish.
Two months must bring it to the proof.
He was quite delighted.
There was no comfort in having him in London;
he might as well be at Enscombe; but Richmond was the very distance for
easy intercourse.
Mr.
Weston’s ball was to be a real thing.
A very few to-morrows stood
between the young people of Highbury and happiness.
May was better for every thing than February.
Mrs.
CHAPTER II


No misfortune occurred, again to prevent the ball.
The day approached,
the day arrived; and after a morning of some anxious watching, Frank
Churchill, in all the certainty of his own self, reached Randalls
before dinner, and every thing was safe.
Weston had been so very earnest in his
entreaties for her arriving there as soon as possible after themselves,
for the purpose of taking her opinion as to the propriety and comfort
of the rooms before any other persons came, that she could not refuse
him, and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man’s
company.
She was to convey Harriet, and they drove to the Crown in good
time, the Randalls party just sufficiently before them.
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr.
Emma found that it was not Mr.
Weston’s fault that the number of privy
councillors was not yet larger.
They had stopped at Mrs.
Mrs.
Elton was spoken of. “I think she must be here soon,” said he. “I
have a great curiosity to see Mrs.
It cannot be long, I think, before she comes.”

A carriage was heard.
The carriage was sent for them now.
Emma
longed to know what Frank’s first opinion of Mrs.
He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion,
by giving her very proper attention, after the introduction had passed.
Suckling nor me
had ever any patience with them; and we used sometimes to say very
cutting things!
Elton turned to Mrs.
As the door
opened she was heard,

“So very obliging of you!—No rain at all.
I do not
care for myself.
Quite thick shoes.
And Jane declares—Well!—(as soon as
she was within the door) Well!
Could
not have imagined it.—So well lighted up!—Jane, Jane, look!—did you
ever see any thing?
Mrs.
Stokes,’ said
I—but I had not time for more.” She was now met by Mrs.
Ah! dear Mrs.
Elton had most
kindly sent Jane a note, or we should have been.—But two such offers in
one day!—Never were such neighbours.
I made her take her shawl—for the evenings are not
warm—her large new shawl— Mrs.
Dixon’s wedding-present.—So kind of her
to think of my mother!
Mr.
Must go and speak to Dr. and Mrs.
This is
delightful, is not it?—Where’s dear Mr.
How do
you do, Mr.
Otway, I protest!—and good Mr.
Otway, and Miss Otway and Miss
Caroline.—Such a host of friends!—and Mr.
Arthur!—How do
you do?
And such a noble fire!—I am quite roasted.
Whether he were overhearing too, she
could not determine.
Elton was
evidently wanting to be complimented herself—and it was, “How do you
like my gown?—How do you like my trimming?—How has Wright done my
hair?”—with many other relative questions, all answered with patient
politeness.
I like him very well.”

At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could not
but imagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want to hear
more;—and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till
another suspension brought Mrs.
It had just occurred to Mrs.
Knightley’s not dancing than by any thing else.—There
he was, among the standers-by, where he ought not to be; he ought to be
dancing,—not classing himself with the husbands, and fathers, and
whist-players, who were pretending to feel an interest in the dance
till their rubbers were made up,—so young as he looked!—He could not
have appeared to greater advantage perhaps anywhere, than where he had
placed himself.
She wished he
could love a ballroom better, and could like Frank Churchill better.—He
seemed often observing her.
She must not flatter herself that he
thought of her dancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour, she
did not feel afraid.
That Frank Churchill thought less of her than he had done, was
indubitable.
Weston, were not thrown away.
There was one, however, which Emma thought something
of.—The two last dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had no
partner;—the only young lady sitting down;—and so equal had been
hitherto the number of dancers, that how there could be any one
disengaged was the wonder!—But Emma’s wonder lessened soon afterwards,
on seeing Mr.
Gilbert wishes to dance,” said he, “I shall have great
pleasure, I am sure—for, though beginning to feel myself rather an old
married man, and that my dancing days are over, it would give me very
great pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs.
Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a young lady
disengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing—Miss Smith.” “Miss
Smith!—oh!—I had not observed.—You are extremely obliging—and if I were
not an old married man.—But my dancing days are over, Mrs.
This was Mr.
Elton!
the amiable, obliging, gentle Mr.
In another moment a happier sight caught her;—Mr.
Weston begs you to put on your tippet.
Excellent dancing indeed!—Yes, my dear, I ran home, as I
said I should, to help grandmama to bed, and got back again, and nobody
missed me.—I set off without saying a word, just as I told you.
Grandmama was quite well, had a charming evening with Mr.
Elton, I do not know who will ask her next, perhaps Mr.
William Cox.’
My dear sir, you are too obliging.—Is there nobody you would not
rather?—I am not helpless.
Upon my word, Jane
on one arm, and me on the other!—Stop, stop, let us stand a little
back, Mrs.
Quite the queen
of the evening!—Well, here we are at the passage.
Two steps, Jane, take
care of the two steps.
I am all amazement! could not have supposed any thing!—Such
elegance and profusion!—I have seen nothing like it since—Well, where
shall we sit? where shall we sit?
What you direct in this house cannot be wrong.
Soup too!
I should not be helped so soon, but it smells most excellent,
and I cannot help beginning.”

Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr.
He was warm in his
reprobation of Mr.
I leave you to your own reflections.”

“Can you trust me with such flatterers?—Does my vain spirit ever tell
me I am wrong?”

“Not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit.—If one leads you wrong,
I am sure the other tells you of it.”

“I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr.
Elton.
There
is a littleness about him which you discovered, and which I did not:
and I was fully convinced of his being in love with Harriet.
Every body is lazy!
She did not regret it.
A young lady who faints, must be recovered; questions must be answered,
and surprizes be explained.
A few minutes made Emma acquainted
with the whole.
But poor Harriet could not follow.
He had left them completely frightened; and Harriet
eagerly clinging to him, and hardly able to speak, had just strength
enough to reach Hartfield, before her spirits were quite overcome.
It
was his idea to bring her to Hartfield: he had thought of no other
place.
This was the amount of the whole story,—of his communication and of
Harriet’s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech.—He dared
not stay longer than to see her well; these several delays left him not
another minute to lose; and Emma engaging to give assurance of her
safety to Mrs.
Knightley, he set off, with all the
grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and herself.
Such an adventure as this,—a fine young man and a lovely young woman
thrown together in such a way, could hardly fail of suggesting certain
ideas to the coldest heart and the steadiest brain.
Could a linguist, could a grammarian, could even a mathematician
have seen what she did, have witnessed their appearance together, and
heard their history of it, without feeling that circumstances had been
at work to make them peculiarly interesting to each other?—How much
more must an imaginist, like herself, be on fire with speculation and
foresight!—especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as her
mind had already made.
It was a very extraordinary thing!
Nothing of the sort had ever
occurred before to any young ladies in the place, within her memory; no
rencontre, no alarm of the kind;—and now it had happened to the very
person, and at the very hour, when the other very person was chancing
to pass by to rescue her!—It certainly was very extraordinary!—And
knowing, as she did, the favourable state of mind of each at this
period, it struck her the more.
It was not possible that the occurrence
should not be strongly recommending each to the other.
There could be no harm in a scheme, a mere passive
scheme.
It was no more than a wish.
Beyond it she would on no account
proceed.
The last
night’s ball seemed lost in the gipsies.
Poor Mr.
The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice; they took
themselves off in a hurry.
Cannot you guess what this parcel
holds?” said she, with a conscious look.

“Not the least in the world.—Did he ever give you any thing?”

“No—I cannot call them gifts; but they are things that I have valued
very much.”

She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the words _Most_
_precious_ _treasures_ on the top.
Her curiosity was greatly excited.
Harriet unfolded the parcel, and she looked on with impatience.
John Knightley came—I think the
very evening.—Do not you remember his cutting his finger with your new
penknife, and your recommending court-plaister?—But, as you had none
about you, and knew I had, you desired me to supply him; and so I took
mine out and cut him a piece; but it was a great deal too large, and he
cut it smaller, and kept playing some time with what was left, before
he gave it back to me.
And so then, in my nonsense, I could not help
making a treasure of it—so I put it by never to be used, and looked at
it now and then as a great treat.”

“My dearest Harriet!” cried Emma, putting her hand before her face, and
jumping up, “you make me more ashamed of myself than I can bear.
Remember it?
And secretly she added to herself, “Lord
bless me! when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton a
piece of court-plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about!
I
never was equal to this.”

“Here,” resumed Harriet, turning to her box again, “here is something
still more valuable, I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable, because
this is what did really once belong to him, which the court-plaister
never did.”

Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure.
Mr.
Knightley had been telling him something about
brewing spruce-beer, and he wanted to put it down; but when he took out
his pencil, there was so little lead that he soon cut it all away, and
it would not do, so you lent him another, and this was left upon the
table as good for nothing.
I have nothing more to shew you, or to say—except that
I am now going to throw them both behind the fire, and I wish you to
see me do it.”

“My poor dear Harriet! and have you actually found happiness in
treasuring up these things?”

“Yes, simpleton as I was!—but I am quite ashamed of it now, and wish I
could forget as easily as I can burn them.
Emma was not thinking of it at the moment, which
made the information she received more valuable.
Elton indeed!” cried Harriet indignantly.—“Oh! no”—and Emma could
just catch the words, “so superior to Mr.
Elton!”

She then took a longer time for consideration.
Should she proceed no
farther?—should she let it pass, and seem to suspect nothing?—Perhaps
Harriet might think her cold or angry if she did; or perhaps if she
were totally silent, it might only drive Harriet into asking her to
hear too much; and against any thing like such an unreserve as had
been, such an open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances, she
was perfectly resolved.—She believed it would be wiser for her to say
and know at once, all that she meant to say and know.
Your
resolution, or rather your expectation of never marrying, results from
an idea that the person whom you might prefer, would be too greatly
your superior in situation to think of you.
Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption to suppose—
Indeed I am not so mad.—But it is a pleasure to me to admire him at a
distance—and to think of his infinite superiority to all the rest of
the world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which are so
proper, in me especially.”

“I am not at all surprized at you, Harriet.
Consider what you are about.
I am determined against all interference.
We were
very wrong before; we will be cautious now.—He is your superior, no
doubt, and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious
nature; but yet, Harriet, more wonderful things have taken place, there
have been matches of greater disparity.
I
would not have you too sanguine; though, however it may end, be assured
your raising your thoughts to _him_, is a mark of good taste which I
shall always know how to value.”

Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude.
Emma was
very decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing for her
friend.
Its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind—and it must
be saving her from the danger of degradation.
The
Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings, and of the use
to be made of their barouche-landau; and Jane Fairfax was still at her
grandmother’s; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was
again delayed, and August, instead of Midsummer, fixed for it, she was
likely to remain there full two months longer, provided at least she
were able to defeat Mrs.
Knightley began to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with
Jane Fairfax.
Weston and their son, Miss Bates
and her niece, who had accidentally met.
You mentioned it as what was
certainly to be very soon.
I am glad he
can afford it.
And at others, what a heap of absurdities it is!
Well, Frank, your
dream certainly shews that Highbury is in your thoughts when you are
absent.
She had hurried on before her guests to
prepare her father for their appearance, and was beyond the reach of
Mr.
Frank Churchill might have—I do not mean
to say that he did not dream it—I am sure I have sometimes the oddest
dreams in the world—but if I am questioned about it, I must acknowledge
that there was such an idea last spring; for Mrs.
Mrs.
Jane, don’t you remember
grandmama’s telling us of it when we got home?
Mrs.
I am a talker, you know; I am rather a talker; and
now and then I have let a thing escape me which I should not.
From Frank Churchill’s face, where he
thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away, he had
involuntarily turned to hers; but she was indeed behind, and too busy
with her shawl.
Knightley suspected in Frank
Churchill the determination of catching her eye—he seemed watching her
intently—in vain, however, if it were so—Jane passed between them into
the hall, and looked at neither.
Knightley must take his seat with the rest round
the large modern circular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield,
and which none but Emma could have had power to place there and
persuade her father to use, instead of the small-sized Pembroke, on
which two of his daily meals had, for forty years been crowded.
They were rapidly forming words
for each other, or for any body else who would be puzzled.
The
quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for Mr.
Weston had occasionally introduced, and who now sat happily occupied in
lamenting, with tender melancholy, over the departure of the “poor
little boys,” or in fondly pointing out, as he took up any stray letter
near him, how beautifully Emma had written it.
Frank was next to
Emma, Jane opposite to them—and Mr.
Knightley so placed as to see them
all; and it was his object to see as much as he could, with as little
apparent observation.
Mr.
How the delicacy, the discretion
of his favourite could have been so lain asleep!
With great indignation did he continue to observe him; with great alarm
and distrust, to observe also his two blinded companions.
She was
evidently displeased; looked up, and seeing herself watched, blushed
more deeply than he had ever perceived her, and saying only, “I did not
know that proper names were allowed,” pushed away the letters with even
an angry spirit, and looked resolved to be engaged by no other word
that could be offered.
Her face was averted from those who had made the
attack, and turned towards her aunt.

“Aye, very true, my dear,” cried the latter, though Jane had not spoken
a word—“I was just going to say the same thing.
She was immediately up, and wanting to quit the table;
but so many were also moving, that she could not get away; and Mr.
He could not see her
in a situation of such danger, without trying to preserve her.
I saw
the word, and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining
to the one, and so very distressing to the other.”

Emma was extremely confused.
Interference—fruitless
interference.
Yet he would speak.
And how could
it possibly come into your head?”

“I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment between
them—certain expressive looks, which I did not believe meant to be
public.”

“Oh! you amuse me excessively.
There is no
admiration between them, I do assure you; and the appearances which
have caught you, have arisen from some peculiar circumstances—feelings
rather of a totally different nature—it is impossible exactly to
explain:—there is a good deal of nonsense in it—but the part which is
capable of being communicated, which is sense, is, that they are as far
from any attachment or admiration for one another, as any two beings in
the world can be.
That he might not be irritated into an absolute
fever, by the fire which Mr.
No such
importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at
present.
In the daily interchange of news, they must be again
restricted to the other topics with which for a while the Sucklings’
coming had been united, such as the last accounts of Mrs.
Weston, whose happiness it was to be hoped might
eventually be as much increased by the arrival of a child, as that of
all her neighbours was by the approach of it.
It was the delay of a great deal
of pleasure and parade.
Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the
Sucklings did not come?
They could go there again with them in the
autumn.
Two or three more
of the chosen only were to be admitted to join them, and it was to be
done in a quiet, unpretending, elegant way, infinitely superior to the
bustle and preparation, the regular eating and drinking, and picnic
parade of the Eltons and the Sucklings.
Now, as her objection was nothing
but her very great dislike of Mrs.
Weston’s temper.

“I am glad you approve of what I have done,” said he very comfortably.
“But I thought you would.
One could not
leave her out.”

Emma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none of it in private.
What
are we to do?—The year will wear away at this rate, and nothing done.
Before this time last year I assure you we had had a delightful
exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston.”

“You had better explore to Donwell,” replied Mr.
Name your
day, and I will come.
Knightley;—and till she is in being, I will manage such
matters myself.”

“Ah! you are an odd creature!” she cried, satisfied to have no one
preferred to herself.—“You are a humourist, and may say what you like.
I know you are attached to them.”

“You certainly will meet them if I can prevail; and I shall call on
Miss Bates in my way home.”

“That’s quite unnecessary; I see Jane every day:—but as you like.
There is to be
no form or parade—a sort of gipsy party.
The nature and the simplicity of
gentlemen and ladies, with their servants and furniture, I think is
best observed by meals within doors.
And, by the bye,
can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion?—Pray be
sincere, Knightley.
Cole’s.
I would wish every thing
to be as much to your taste as possible.”

“That I am sure you would.
Indeed I do you justice, my good friend.
He
wished to persuade Mr.
Woodhouse must not, under the
specious pretence of a morning drive, and an hour or two spent at
Donwell, be tempted away to his misery.
Knightley to invite them—very kind
and sensible—much cleverer than dining out.—He was not fond of dining
out.”

Mr.
Knightley was fortunate in every body’s most ready concurrence.
Woodhouse was
safely conveyed in his carriage, with one window down, to partake of
this al-fresco party; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the
Abbey, especially prepared for him by a fire all the morning, he was
happily placed, quite at his ease, ready to talk with pleasure of what
had been achieved, and advise every body to come and sit down, and not
to heat themselves.—Mrs.
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that as soon as she
was satisfied of her father’s comfort, she was glad to leave him, and
look around her; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more
particular observation, more exact understanding of a house and grounds
which must ever be so interesting to her and all her family.
These
were pleasant feelings, and she walked about and indulged them till it
was necessary to do as the others did, and collect round the
strawberry-beds.—The whole party were assembled, excepting Frank
Churchill, who was expected every moment from Richmond; and Mrs.
Elton,
in all her apparatus of happiness, her large bonnet and her basket, was
very ready to lead the way in gathering, accepting, or
talking—strawberries, and only strawberries, could now be thought or
spoken of.—“The best fruit in England—every body’s favourite—always
wholesome.—These the finest beds and finest sorts.—Delightful to gather
for one’s self—the only way of really enjoying them.—Morning decidedly
the best time—never tired—every sort good—hautboy infinitely
superior—no comparison—the others hardly eatable—hautboys very
scarce—Chili preferred—white wood finest flavour of all—price of
strawberries in London—abundance about Bristol—Maple
Grove—cultivation—beds when to be renewed—gardeners thinking exactly
different—no general rule—gardeners never to be put out of their
way—delicious fruit—only too rich to be eaten much of—inferior to
cherries—currants more refreshing—only objection to gathering
strawberries the stooping—glaring sun—tired to death—could bear it no
longer—must go and sit in the shade.”

Such, for half an hour, was the conversation—interrupted only once by
Mrs.
Bragge, but in felicity and splendour it
fell short only of them: it was with a cousin of Mrs.
Elton insisted on being authorised to write an
acquiescence by the morrow’s post.—How Jane could bear it at all, was
astonishing to Emma.—She did look vexed, she did speak pointedly—and at
last, with a decision of action unusual to her, proposed a
removal.—“Should not they walk?
It was hot; and after walking some time over the gardens in a
scattered, dispersed way, scarcely any three together, they insensibly
followed one another to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of
limes, which stretching beyond the garden at an equal distance from the
river, seemed the finish of the pleasure grounds.—It led to nothing;
nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars,
which seemed intended, in their erection, to give the appearance of an
approach to the house, which never had been there.
Disputable, however,
as might be the taste of such a termination, it was in itself a
charming walk, and the view which closed it extremely pretty.—The
considerable slope, at nearly the foot of which the Abbey stood,
gradually acquired a steeper form beyond its grounds; and at half a
mile distant was a bank of considerable abruptness and grandeur, well
clothed with wood;—and at the bottom of this bank, favourably placed
and sheltered, rose the Abbey Mill Farm, with meadows in front, and the
river making a close and handsome curve around it.
In this walk Emma and Mr.
It was too old a story.—Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of
Harriet.—They took a few turns together along the walk.—The shade was
most refreshing, and Emma found it the pleasantest part of the day.
Weston looked, and looked in vain.
Weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise
and variety which her spirits seemed to need.
Mr.
Woodhouse had been exceedingly
well amused.
It can be
round in five minutes.”

“Thank you, thank you—but on no account.—I would rather walk.—And for
_me_ to be afraid of walking alone!—I, who may so soon have to guard
others!”

She spoke with great agitation; and Emma very feelingly replied, “That
can be no reason for your being exposed to danger now.
Emma had not been thinking of him, she had
forgotten to think of him—but she was very glad to see him.
The heat was excessive; he had never suffered any thing
like it—almost wished he had staid at home—nothing killed him like
heat—he could bear any degree of cold, etc., but heat was
intolerable—and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from the
slight remains of Mr.
Woodhouse’s fire, looking very deplorable.

“You will soon be cooler, if you sit still,” said Emma.

“As soon as I am cooler I shall go back again.
You will all be
going soon I suppose; the whole party breaking up.
He was not hungry; it would only make him
hotter.” In two minutes, however, he relented in his own favour; and
muttering something about spruce-beer, walked off.
I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that I
shall soon be abroad.
I am thwarted in
every thing material.
I do not consider myself at all a fortunate
person.”

“You are not quite so miserable, though, as when you first came.
You are my best cure.”

“We are going to Box Hill to-morrow;—you will join us.
I shall press you no more.”

The rest of the party were now returning, and all were soon collected.
Frank
Churchill’s little inclination to exclude himself increased so much,
that his last words to Emma were,

“Well;—if _you_ wish me to stay and join the party, I will.”

She smiled her acceptance; and nothing less than a summons from
Richmond was to take him back before the following evening.
CHAPTER VII


They had a very fine day for Box Hill; and all the other outward
circumstances of arrangement, accommodation, and punctuality, were in
favour of a pleasant party.
Mr.
Weston directed the whole, officiating
safely between Hartfield and the Vicarage, and every body was in good
time.
Weston remained with Mr.
Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment, and every body
had a burst of admiration on first arriving; but in the general amount
of the day there was deficiency.
And Mr.
Mr. and Mrs.
He said nothing worth hearing—looked
without seeing—admired without intelligence—listened without knowing
what she said.
While he was so dull, it was no wonder that Harriet
should be dull likewise; and they were both insufferable.
When they all sat down it was better; to her taste a great deal better,
for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay, making her his first
object.
Every distinguishing attention that could be paid, was paid to
her.
To amuse her, and be agreeable in her eyes, seemed all that he
cared for—and Emma, glad to be enlivened, not sorry to be flattered,
was gay and easy too, and gave him all the friendly encouragement, the
admission to be gallant, which she had ever given in the first and most
animating period of their acquaintance; but which now, in her own
estimation, meant nothing, though in the judgment of most people
looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word but
flirtation could very well describe. “Mr.
Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse flirted together excessively.” They were laying themselves
open to that very phrase—and to having it sent off in a letter to Maple
Grove by one lady, to Ireland by another.
Not that Emma was gay and
thoughtless from any real felicity; it was rather because she felt less
happy than she had expected.
I can have no self-command without a
motive.
And you can be always
with me.
I thought I had seen you
first in February.”

“Your gallantry is really unanswerable.
But (lowering her voice)—nobody
speaks except ourselves, and it is rather too much to be talking
nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people.”

“I say nothing of which I am ashamed,” replied he, with lively
impudence. “I saw you first in February.
Let me hear any thing rather than what you are all
thinking of.
Knightley,) and I will try to hold my tongue.
Weston. “Agreed, agreed.
Weston. “It is too
much a matter of fact, but here it is.—What two letters of the alphabet
are there, that express perfection?”

“What two letters!—express perfection!
It might be a very
indifferent piece of wit, but Emma found a great deal to laugh at and
enjoy in it—and so did Frank and Harriet.—It did not seem to touch the
rest of the party equally; some looked very stupid about it, and Mr.
I
have a great deal of vivacity in my own way, but I really must be
allowed to judge when to speak and when to hold my tongue.
Shall we walk, Augusta?”

“With all my heart.
It is
only by seeing women in their own homes, among their own set, just as
they always are, that you can form any just judgment.
Frank
Churchill turned towards her to listen.

“You were speaking,” said he, gravely.
You provide for the family, you know, (with a
smile at his father).
I am in no hurry.
I care for nothing else.
Elton?”

“If you please, my dear.
I am quite ready.
I was
ready to have gone with her, but this will do just as well.
Mr.
The appearance of the servants looking out for them to
give notice of the carriages was a joyful sight; and even the bustle of
collecting and preparing to depart, and the solicitude of Mrs.
Such another scheme, composed of so many
ill-assorted people, she hoped never to be betrayed into again.
While waiting for the carriage, she found Mr.
I cannot see you acting wrong, without a remonstrance.
Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave every harmless
absurdity to take its chance, I would not quarrel with you for any
liberties of manner.
Were she your equal in situation—but, Emma,
consider how far this is from being the case.
Her situation should secure your compassion.
It was
badly done, indeed!
He had
misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted, and her
tongue motionless.
The truth
of this representation there was no denying.
She felt it at her heart.
There was only Harriet, who seemed not in spirits herself,
fagged, and very willing to be silent; and Emma felt the tears running
down her cheeks almost all the way home, without being at any trouble
to check them, extraordinary as they were.
She had no objection.
Bates, civil and humble as usual, looked as if she did
not quite understand what was going on.

“I am afraid Jane is not very well,” said she, “but I do not know; they
_tell_ me she is well.
I dare say my daughter will be here presently,
Miss Woodhouse.
I hope you find a chair.
I am sure she will be here presently.”

Emma seriously hoped she would.
She had a moment’s fear of Miss Bates
keeping away from her.
She is as low as
possible.
But, now that she has written her letters, she says she shall soon be
well.
Cole,’
said I, ‘depend upon it.
Her heart had been long growing
kinder towards Jane; and this picture of her present sufferings acted
as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion, and left her nothing
but pity; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle
sensations of the past, obliged her to admit that Jane might very
naturally resolve on seeing Mrs.
Cole or any other steady friend, when
she might not bear to see herself.
Elton, I suppose, has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes—”

“Yes, our good Mrs.
The most indefatigable, true friend.
She
would not take a denial.
She would not let Jane say, ‘No;’ for when
Jane first heard of it, (it was the day before yesterday, the very
morning we were at Donwell,) when Jane first heard of it, she was quite
decided against accepting the offer, and for the reasons you mention;
exactly as you say, she had made up her mind to close with nothing till
Colonel Campbell’s return, and nothing should induce her to enter into
any engagement at present—and so she told Mrs.
It is not every body that would have stood out in
such a kind way as she did, and refuse to take Jane’s answer; but she
positively declared she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday, as
Jane wished her; she would wait—and, sure enough, yesterday evening it
was all settled that Jane should go.
Elton declared she would not let
him off, he did not;—but my mother, and Jane, and I, were all there,
and a very agreeable evening we had.
Such kind friends, you know, Miss
Woodhouse, one must always find agreeable, though every body seemed
rather fagged after the morning’s party.
Except the Sucklings and
Bragges, there is not such another nursery establishment, so liberal
and elegant, in all Mrs.
Elton’s acquaintance.
Mrs.
Campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself before
their return?”

“Yes; Jane says she is sure they will; but yet, this is such a
situation as she cannot feel herself justified in declining.
I was so
astonished when she first told me what she had been saying to Mrs.
It was before tea—stay—no, it could not be before tea, because
we were just going to cards—and yet it was before tea, because I
remember thinking—Oh! no, now I recollect, now I have it; something
happened before tea, but not that.
Mr.
And poor
John’s son came to talk to Mr.
Frank Churchill’s
going, she proceeded to give them all, it was of no consequence.
There was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest, and it
caught Emma’s attention only as it united with the subject which
already engaged her mind.
What is to become
of that?—Very true.
Poor dear Jane was talking of it just now.—‘You
must go,’ said she. ‘You and I must part.
Mr.
I am going to London, to spend
a few days with John and Isabella.
Time,
however, she thought, would tell him that they ought to be friends
again.
She is always so
attentive to them!”

Emma’s colour was heightened by this unjust praise; and with a smile,
and shake of the head, which spoke much, she looked at Mr.
It was a pity that she had not come back earlier!
He had long made up his mind to Jane Fairfax’s
going out as governess, and could talk of it cheerfully, but Mr.
I hope it is a dry
situation, and that her health will be taken good care of.
And I hope she will be better off in one respect, and not be
induced to go away after it has been her home so long.”

The following day brought news from Richmond to throw every thing else
into the background.
An express arrived at Randalls to announce the
death of Mrs.
Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman stoops
to folly, she has nothing to do but to die; and when she stoops to be
disagreeable, it is equally to be recommended as a clearer of ill-fame.
Churchill, after being disliked at least twenty-five years, was
now spoken of with compassionate allowances.
Churchill’s loss would be
dreadful indeed.
Churchill, independent of his
wife, was feared by nobody; an easy, guidable man, to be persuaded into
any thing by his nephew.
Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion, with great
self-command.
Emma was gratified, to observe such a proof in her of
strengthened character, and refrained from any allusion that might
endanger its maintenance.
They spoke, therefore, of Mrs.
She wanted
to be of use to her; wanted to shew a value for her society, and
testify respect and consideration.
The invitation
was refused, and by a verbal message. “Miss Fairfax was not well enough
to write;” and when Mr.
Perry was uneasy about her.
Her
present home, he could not but observe, was unfavourable to a nervous
disorder:—confined always to one room;—he could have wished it
otherwise—and her good aunt, though his very old friend, he must
acknowledge to be not the best companion for an invalid of that
description.
Emma listened with the warmest concern;
grieved for her more and more, and looked around eager to discover some
way of being useful.
To take her—be it only an hour or two—from her
aunt, to give her change of air and scene, and quiet rational
conversation, even for an hour or two, might do her good; and the
following morning she wrote again to say, in the most feeling language
she could command, that she would call for her in the carriage at any
hour that Jane would name—mentioning that she had Mr.
The answer was
only in this short note:

“Miss Fairfax’s compliments and thanks, but is quite unequal to any
exercise.”

Emma felt that her own note had deserved something better; but it was
impossible to quarrel with words, whose tremulous inequality shewed
indisposition so plainly, and she thought only of how she might best
counteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted.
Perry had said so much—but, except
them, Jane would really see nobody.”

Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs.
Her heart was grieved for a state which seemed but the more pitiable
from this sort of irritation of spirits, inconsistency of action, and
inequality of powers; and it mortified her that she was given so little
credit for proper feeling, or esteemed so little worthy as a friend:
but she had the consolation of knowing that her intentions were good,
and of being able to say to herself, that could Mr.
Knightley have been
privy to all her attempts of assisting Jane Fairfax, could he even have
seen into her heart, he would not, on this occasion, have found any
thing to reprove.
She must see you.”

“Is she unwell?”

“No, no, not at all—only a little agitated.
But what can be the matter?—Is she really not
ill?”

“Depend upon me—but ask no more questions.
You will know it all in
time.
I know it has.
Which of them is it?—I charge you
by all that is sacred, not to attempt concealment.”

“Upon my word, Emma.”—

“Your word!—why not your honour!—why not say upon your honour, that it
has nothing to do with any of them?
Her fancy was very active.
You will not see him.
I shall not be far off, if you want me.”—And Emma distinctly
heard him add, in a lower tone, before he quitted the room,—“I have
been as good as my word.
She has not the least idea.”

Mrs.
I have been
walking all this way in complete suspense.
Frank Churchill, I do guess.”

“You are right.
It does relate to him, and I will tell you directly;”
(resuming her work, and seeming resolved against looking up.) “He has
been here this very morning, on a most extraordinary errand.
You are not serious?
I can hardly believe it.—I thought I knew
him.”

Emma scarcely heard what was said.—Her mind was divided between two
ideas—her own former conversations with him about Miss Fairfax; and
poor Harriet;—and for some time she could only exclaim, and require
confirmation, repeated confirmation.

“Well,” said she at last, trying to recover herself; “this is a
circumstance which I must think of at least half a day, before I can at
all comprehend it.
Weston looked up, afraid to believe; but Emma’s countenance was as
steady as her words.

“That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast, of my
present perfect indifference,” she continued, “I will farther tell you,
that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance, when I
did like him, when I was very much disposed to be attached to him—nay,
was attached—and how it came to cease, is perhaps the wonder.
You may
believe me, Mrs.
Weston.
This is the simple truth.”

Mrs.
Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself,” said she. “On
this point we have been wretched.
He was here only a
quarter of an hour, and in a state of agitation which did not allow the
full use even of the time he could stay—but that there had been
misunderstandings he decidedly said.
The present crisis, indeed, seemed
to be brought on by them; and those misunderstandings might very
possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct.”

“Impropriety!
So unlike what a man should be!—None of that upright
integrity, that strict adherence to truth and principle, that disdain
of trick and littleness, which a man should display in every
transaction of his life.”

“Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for though he has been wrong
in this instance, I have known him long enough to answer for his having
many, very many, good qualities; and—”

“Good God!” cried Emma, not attending to her.—“Mrs.
Jane actually on the point of going as governess!
Weston. “He told me at
parting, that he should soon write; and he spoke in a manner which
seemed to promise me many particulars that could not be given now.
I must love him; and now that I am
satisfied on one point, the one material point, I am sincerely anxious
for its all turning out well, and ready to hope that it may.
Churchill lived, I suppose there could not have
been a hope, a chance, a possibility;—but scarcely are her remains at
rest in the family vault, than her husband is persuaded to act exactly
opposite to what she would have required.
And
how much may be said in her situation for even that error!”

“Much, indeed!” cried Emma feelingly. “If a woman can ever be excused
for thinking only of herself, it is in a situation like Jane
Fairfax’s.—Of such, one may almost say, that ‘the world is not their’s,
nor the world’s law.’”

She met Mr.
His companions
suggested only what could palliate imprudence, or smooth objections;
and by the time they had talked it all over together, and he had talked
it all over again with Emma, in their walk back to Hartfield, he was
become perfectly reconciled, and not far from thinking it the very best
thing that Frank could possibly have done.
Frank Churchill had behaved
very ill by herself—very ill in many ways,—but it was not so much _his_
behaviour as her _own_, which made her so angry with him.
Mr.
She might have
prevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments.
Her influence
would have been enough.
An airing in the Hartfield carriage would have been the rack,
and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have been poison.
Mr.
Weston felt when _she_ was approaching Randalls.
Could the
event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance!—But of that,
unfortunately, there could be no chance.

“Well, Miss Woodhouse!” cried Harriet, coming eagerly into the room—“is
not this the oddest news that ever was?”

“What news do you mean?” replied Emma, unable to guess, by look or
voice, whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint.

“About Jane Fairfax.
Oh!—you
need not be afraid of owning it to me, for Mr.
Weston has told me
himself.
Emma looked at
her, quite unable to speak.

“Had you any idea,” cried Harriet, “of his being in love with her?—You,
perhaps, might.—You (blushing as she spoke) who can see into every
body’s heart; but nobody else—”

“Upon my word,” said Emma, “I begin to doubt my having any such talent.
Dear Miss Woodhouse, how could you so mistake me?”
turning away distressed.

“Harriet!” cried Emma, after a moment’s pause—“What do you mean?—Good
Heaven! what do you mean?—Mistake you!—Am I to suppose then?—”

She could not speak another word.—Her voice was lost; and she sat down,
waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer.
Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face turned from
her, did not immediately say any thing; and when she did speak, it was
in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma’s.

“I should not have thought it possible,” she began, “that you could
have misunderstood me!
Mr.
I hope I have a better taste than
to think of Mr.
I could
almost assert that you had _named_ Mr.
Frank Churchill.
I am sure the
service Mr.
Miss Woodhouse, how you do forget!”

“My dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the substance of what I said on
the occasion.
It was not the
gipsies—it was not Mr.
No! (with some
elevation) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance—of Mr.
Knightley’s coming and asking me to dance, when Mr.
At
least, however, I cannot be worse off than I should have been, if the
other had been the person; and now—it _is_ possible—”

She paused a few moments.
You must
think one five hundred million times more above me than the other.
But
I hope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing—that if—strange as it may
appear—.
Knightley’s returning your affection?”

“Yes,” replied Harriet modestly, but not fearfully—“I must say that I
have.”

Emma’s eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat silently meditating,
in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes.
Knightley, than with Frank Churchill?
Knightley must marry no one but herself!
She saw it all with a clearness which had never blessed
her before.
How improperly had she been acting by Harriet!
How
inconsiderate, how indelicate, how irrational, how unfeeling had been
her conduct!
What blindness, what madness, had led her on!
Knightley—but justice
required that she should not be made unhappy by any coldness now,) gave
Emma the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmness, with even
apparent kindness.—For her own advantage indeed, it was fit that the
utmost extent of Harriet’s hopes should be enquired into; and Harriet
had done nothing to forfeit the regard and interest which had been so
voluntarily formed and maintained—or to deserve to be slighted by the
person, whose counsels had never led her right.—Rousing from
reflection, therefore, and subduing her emotion, she turned to Harriet
again, and, in a more inviting accent, renewed the conversation; for as
to the subject which had first introduced it, the wonderful story of
Jane Fairfax, that was quite sunk and lost.—Neither of them thought but
of Mr.
Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie, was yet very glad
to be called from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge,
and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation, to
give the history of her hopes with great, though trembling
delight.—Emma’s tremblings as she asked, and as she listened, were
better concealed than Harriet’s, but they were not less.
Her voice was
not unsteady; but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a
development of self, such a burst of threatening evil, such a confusion
of sudden and perplexing emotions, must create.—She listened with much
inward suffering, but with great outward patience, to Harriet’s
detail.—Methodical, or well arranged, or very well delivered, it could
not be expected to be; but it contained, when separated from all the
feebleness and tautology of the narration, a substance to sink her
spirit—especially with the corroborating circumstances, which her own
memory brought in favour of Mr.
Knightley’s most improved opinion of
Harriet.
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since
those two decisive dances.—Emma knew that he had, on that occasion,
found her much superior to his expectation.
Emma knew it
to have been very much the case.
She had often observed the change, to
almost the same extent.—Harriet repeated expressions of approbation and
praise from him—and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with
what she had known of his opinion of Harriet.
The
superior degree of confidence towards Harriet, which this one article
marked, gave her severe pain.
But Harriet rejected the suspicion with
spirit.

“Mr.
Martin!
No indeed!—There was not a hint of Mr.
You told me to observe him carefully, and let his behaviour be
the rule of mine—and so I have.
Knightley is the
last man in the world, who would intentionally give any woman the idea
of his feeling for her more than he really does.”

Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so
satisfactory; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness, which
at that moment would have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her
father’s footsteps.
He was coming through the hall.
Woodhouse would be alarmed—she had better go;”—with most ready
encouragement from her friend, therefore, she passed off through
another door—and the moment she was gone, this was the spontaneous
burst of Emma’s feelings: “Oh God! that I had never seen her!”

The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough for her
thoughts.—She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had
rushed on her within the last few hours.
How to understand the deceptions she had
been thus practising on herself, and living under!—The blunders, the
blindness of her own head and heart!—she sat still, she walked about,
she tried her own room, she tried the shrubbery—in every place, every
posture, she perceived that she had acted most weakly; that she had
been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree; that she had
been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying; that she was
wretched, and should probably find this day but the beginning of
wretchedness.
Knightley been so dear to her, as every feeling
declared him now to be?
Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when his regard for her had
not been infinitely the most dear.
This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection.
Knightley.—Every other part of her mind
was disgusting.
Mr.
And yet it was far, very
far, from impossible.—Was it a new circumstance for a man of first-rate
abilities to be captivated by very inferior powers?
Oh! had she never brought Harriet forward!
Knightley!—How she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of
such a man till actually assured of it!—But Harriet was less humble,
had fewer scruples than formerly.—Her inferiority, whether of mind or
situation, seemed little felt.—She had seemed more sensible of Mr.
Knightley. _She_ could not.
Could she be secure of that, indeed, of his never marrying at
all, she believed she should be perfectly satisfied.—Let him but
continue the same Mr.
It
would be incompatible with what she owed to her father, and with what
she felt for him.
It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be disappointed; and she
hoped, that when able to see them together again, she might at least be
able to ascertain what the chances for it were.—She should see them
henceforward with the closest observance; and wretchedly as she had
hitherto misunderstood even those she was watching, she did not know
how to admit that she could be blinded here.—He was expected back every
day.
To talk would be only
to irritate.—She wrote to her, therefore, kindly, but decisively, to
beg that she would not, at present, come to Hartfield; acknowledging it
to be her conviction, that all farther confidential discussion of _one_
topic had better be avoided; and hoping, that if a few days were
allowed to pass before they met again, except in the company of
others—she objected only to a tête-à-tête—they might be able to act as
if they had forgotten the conversation of yesterday.—Harriet submitted,
and approved, and was grateful.
Weston, who had
been calling on her daughter-in-law elect, and took Hartfield in her
way home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself, to
relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview.
A little curiosity Emma had; and she made the most of it while her
friend related.
Churchill could be reconciled to the engagement’s becoming known;
as, considering every thing, she thought such a visit could not be paid
without leading to reports:—but Mr.
Weston had thought differently; he
was extremely anxious to shew his approbation to Miss Fairfax and her
family, and did not conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it;
or if it were, that it would be of any consequence; for “such things,”
he observed, “always got about.” Emma smiled, and felt that Mr.
Weston, “she was energetic.
But after all the
punishment that misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct.
Do not let any reflection fall on
the principles or the care of the friends who brought me up.
I am sure she is
very good—I hope she will be very happy.
She talked with
a great deal of reason, and at least equal affection—but she had too
much to urge for Emma’s attention; it was soon gone to Brunswick Square
or to Donwell; she forgot to attempt to listen; and when Mrs.
Be sure to give me
intelligence of the letter as soon as possible.”

Mrs.
She bitterly regretted
not having sought a closer acquaintance with her, and blushed for the
envious feelings which had certainly been, in some measure, the cause.
Had she followed Mr.
Dixon, which she
had not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself, but had so
unpardonably imparted; an idea which she greatly feared had been made a
subject of material distress to the delicacy of Jane’s feelings, by the
levity or carelessness of Frank Churchill’s.
Of all the sources of evil
surrounding the former, since her coming to Highbury, she was persuaded
that she must herself have been the worst.
The weather added what it could of gloom.
The weather affected Mr.
Knightley had walked in then, soon after tea, and
dissipated every melancholy fancy.
They
should lose her; and, probably, in great measure, her husband
also.—Frank Churchill would return among them no more; and Miss
Fairfax, it was reasonable to suppose, would soon cease to belong to
Highbury.
Knightley passing through the garden door, and coming
towards her.—It was the first intimation of his being returned from
London.
She must be collected and calm.
They walked together.
Goddard’s in his way.

“I had a few lines on parish business from Mr.
Knightley,” said Emma, trying to be lively, but really confused—“I
am in a very extraordinary situation.
I cannot let you continue in your
error; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression, I
have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have been
at all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might be
natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.—But I
never have.”

He listened in perfect silence.
He has imposed on me, but he has not injured me.
Emma, I
must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it unsaid the
next moment.”

“Oh! then, don’t speak it, don’t speak it,” she eagerly cried. “Take a
little time, consider, do not commit yourself.”

“Thank you,” said he, in an accent of deep mortification, and not
another syllable followed.
Knightley, and, I am afraid, gave you
pain.—But if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend, or to
ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation—as a
friend, indeed, you may command me.—I will hear whatever you like.
The
dread of being awakened from the happiest dream, was perhaps the most
prominent feeling.

“I cannot make speeches, Emma:” he soon resumed; and in a tone of such
sincere, decided, intelligible tenderness as was tolerably
convincing.—“If I loved you less, I might be able to talk about it
more.
Her way was clear, though not quite
smooth.—She spoke then, on being so entreated.—What did she say?—Just
what she ought, of course.
Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to any human
disclosure; seldom can it happen that something is not a little
disguised, or a little mistaken; but where, as in this case, though the
conduct is mistaken, the feelings are not, it may not be very
material.—Mr.
Frank Churchill’s
character was not desperate.—She was his own Emma, by hand and word,
when they returned into the house; and if he could have thought of
Frank Churchill then, he might have deemed him a very good sort of
fellow.
As long as Mr.
While he lived, it must be only an
engagement; but she flattered herself, that if divested of the danger
of drawing her away, it might become an increase of comfort to him.—How
to do her best by Harriet, was of more difficult decision;—how to spare
her from any unnecessary pain; how to make her any possible atonement;
how to appear least her enemy?—On these subjects, her perplexity and
distress were very great—and her mind had to pass again and again
through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever
surrounded it.—She could only resolve at last, that she would still
avoid a meeting with her, and communicate all that need be told by
letter; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her removed
just now for a time from Highbury, and—indulging in one scheme
more—nearly resolve, that it might be practicable to get an invitation
for her to Brunswick Square.—Isabella had been pleased with Harriet;
and a few weeks spent in London must give her some amusement.—She did
not think it in Harriet’s nature to escape being benefited by novelty
and variety, by the streets, the shops, and the children.—At any rate,
it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herself, from whom
every thing was due; a separation for the present; an averting of the
evil day, when they must all be together again.
Weston.

“I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in forwarding to you the
enclosed.
I know what thorough justice you will do it, and have
scarcely a doubt of its happy effect.—I think we shall never materially
disagree about the writer again; but I will not delay you by a long
preface.—We are quite well.—This letter has been the cure of all the
little nervousness I have been feeling lately.—I did not quite like
your looks on Tuesday, but it was an ungenial morning; and though you
will never own being affected by weather, I think every body feels a
north-east wind.—I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of
Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning, but had the comfort of hearing
last night, by Mr.
I dared not address her openly; my
difficulties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well known to
require definition; and I was fortunate enough to prevail, before we
parted at Weymouth, and to induce the most upright female mind in the
creation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement.—Had she refused, I
should have gone mad.—But you will be ready to say, what was your hope
in doing this?—What did you look forward to?—To any thing, every
thing—to time, chance, circumstance, slow effects, sudden bursts,
perseverance and weariness, health and sickness.
If you need farther
explanation, I have the honour, my dear madam, of being your husband’s
son, and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope for good,
which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever equal the value
of.—See me, then, under these circumstances, arriving on my first visit
to Randalls;—and here I am conscious of wrong, for that visit might
have been sooner paid.
And now I
come to the principal, the only important part of my conduct while
belonging to you, which excites my own anxiety, or requires very
solicitous explanation.
From our relative situation, those attentions were her due, and
were felt to be so.—Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand
me before the expiration of that fortnight, I cannot say;—when I called
to take leave of her, I remember that I was within a moment of
confessing the truth, and I then fancied she was not without suspicion;
but I have no doubt of her having since detected me, at least in some
degree.—She may not have surmised the whole, but her quickness must
have penetrated a part.
While you considered me as having sinned against Emma
Woodhouse, I could deserve nothing from either.
I could not give any connected detail
yesterday; but the suddenness, and, in one light, the unseasonableness
with which the affair burst out, needs explanation; for though the
event of the 26th ult., as you will conclude, immediately opened to me
the happiest prospects, I should not have presumed on such early
measures, but from the very particular circumstances, which left me not
an hour to lose.
I behaved shamefully.
And here I can
admit, that my manners to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F., were
highly blameable. _She_ disapproved them, which ought to have been
enough.—My plea of concealing the truth she did not think
sufficient.—She was displeased; I thought unreasonably so: I thought
her, on a thousand occasions, unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious: I
thought her even cold.
If I had followed her
judgment, and subdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed
proper, I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness I have ever
known.—We quarrelled.— Do you remember the morning spent at
Donwell?—_There_ every little dissatisfaction that had occurred before
came to a crisis.
While I, to blind the world to our engagement, was
behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman,
was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made
every previous caution useless?—Had we been met walking together
between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must have been suspected.—I was
mad enough, however, to resent.—I doubted her affection.
Smallridge’s, near Bristol, stared me
in the face.
I knew the name, the place, I knew all about it, and
instantly saw what she had been doing.
It was perfectly accordant with
that resolution of character which I knew her to possess; and the
secrecy she had maintained, as to any such design in her former letter,
was equally descriptive of its anxious delicacy.
For the world would
not she have seemed to threaten me.—Imagine the shock; imagine how,
till I had actually detected my own blunder, I raved at the blunders of
the post.—What was to be done?—One thing only.—I must speak to my
uncle.
Do not pity me till I saw her wan, sick looks.—I reached Highbury at
the time of day when, from my knowledge of their late breakfast hour, I
was certain of a good chance of finding her alone.—I was not
disappointed; and at last I was not disappointed either in the object
of my journey.
Now, my dear madam, I will release you; but I could not conclude
before.
A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have
ever shewn me, and ten thousand for the attentions your heart will
dictate towards her.—If you think me in a way to be happier than I
deserve, I am quite of your opinion.—Miss W. calls me the child of good
fortune.
CHAPTER XV


This letter must make its way to Emma’s feelings.
As soon as she came to her own name,
it was irresistible; every line relating to herself was interesting,
and almost every line agreeable; and when this charm ceased, the
subject could still maintain itself, by the natural return of her
former regard for the writer, and the very strong attraction which any
picture of love must have for her at that moment.
She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr.
Knightley came again,
she desired him to read it.
I
will take it home with me at night.”

But that would not do.
One man’s style must not be the rule of another’s.
We will not be
severe.”

“It will be natural for me,” he added shortly afterwards, “to speak my
opinion aloud as I read.
It will not be so great a loss of time: but if you dislike it—”

“Not at all.
I should wish it.”

Mr.
Mr.
Weston earned every
present comfort before he endeavoured to gain it.—Very true; he did not
come till Miss Fairfax was here.”

“And I have not forgotten,” said Emma, “how sure you were that he might
have come sooner if he would.
Natural enough!—his own mind full of intrigue,
that he should suspect it in others.—Mystery; Finesse—how they pervert
the understanding!
My Emma, does not every thing serve to prove more
and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with
each other?”

Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet’s
account, which she could not give any sincere explanation of.

“You had better go on,” said she.
Ah!
It was all read,
however, steadily, attentively, and without the smallest remark; and,
excepting one momentary glance at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear
of giving pain—no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist.

“There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends, the
Eltons,” was his next observation.—“His feelings are natural.—What!
actually resolve to break with him entirely!—She felt the engagement to
be a source of repentance and misery to each—she dissolved it.—What a
view this gives of her sense of his behaviour!—Well, he must be a most
extraordinary—”

“Nay, nay, read on.—You will find how very much he suffers.”

“I hope he does,” replied Mr.
Smallridge’s children—a
dear friend of Mrs.
Elton bears the disappointment?”

“Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me to read—not even of
Mrs.
Elton.
Only one page more.
I shall soon have done.
He has had great faults, faults of
inconsideration and thoughtlessness; and I am very much of his opinion
in thinking him likely to be happier than he deserves: but still as he
is, beyond a doubt, really attached to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it
may be hoped, have the advantage of being constantly with her, I am
very ready to believe his character will improve, and acquire from hers
the steadiness and delicacy of principle that it wants.
And now, let me
talk to you of something else.
Ever since I left you this morning, Emma, my mind has been
hard at work on one subject.”

The subject followed; it was in plain, unaffected, gentlemanlike
English, such as Mr.
She could never quit him.” Part only of this
answer, however, was admitted.
Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already had her own passing
thoughts.
He had given it, he could assure her, very long and calm
consideration; he had been walking away from William Larkins the whole
morning, to have his thoughts to himself.

“Ah! there is one difficulty unprovided for,” cried Emma. “I am sure
William Larkins will not like it.
Knightley’s
marrying Jane Fairfax, or any body else, which at the time she had
wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude of the sister and the aunt.
Knightley would be forgotten, that is,
supplanted; but this could not be expected to happen very early.
Mr.
Mr.
She went—she had driven once unsuccessfully to the door, but had not
been into the house since the morning after Box Hill, when poor Jane
had been in such distress as had filled her with compassion, though all
the worst of her sufferings had been unsuspected.—The fear of being
still unwelcome, determined her, though assured of their being at home,
to wait in the passage, and send up her name.—She heard Patty
announcing it; but no such bustle succeeded as poor Miss Bates had
before made so happily intelligible.—No; she heard nothing but the
instant reply of, “Beg her to walk up;”—and a moment afterwards she was
met on the stairs by Jane herself, coming eagerly forward, as if no
other reception of her were felt sufficient.—Emma had never seen her
look so well, so lovely, so engaging.
Mrs.
Elton were together.
Elton elsewhere; but she was in a humour to have patience with every
body; and as Mrs.
Oh! she is a sweet
creature!
Let us be discreet—quite on our good behaviour.—Hush!—You
remember those lines—I forget the poem at this moment:

“For when a lady’s in the case,
“You know all other things give place.”


Now I say, my dear, in _our_ case, for _lady_, read——mum! a word to the
wise.—I am in a fine flow of spirits, an’t I?
But I want to set your
heart at ease as to Mrs.
S.—_My_ representation, you see, has quite
appeased her.”

And again, on Emma’s merely turning her head to look at Mrs.
What say you both to
our collecting the same party, and exploring to Box Hill again, while
the fine weather lasts?—It must be the same party, you know, quite the
same party, not _one_ exception.”

Soon after this Miss Bates came in, and Emma could not help being
diverted by the perplexity of her first answer to herself, resulting,
she supposed, from doubt of what might be said, and impatience to say
every thing.

“Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse, you are all kindness.—It is impossible
to say—Yes, indeed, I quite understand—dearest Jane’s prospects—that
is, I do not mean.—But she is charmingly recovered.—How is Mr.
Perry!—such attention to Jane!”—And from
her great, her more than commonly thankful delight towards Mrs.
Elton, speaking louder, said,

“Yes, here I am, my good friend; and here I have been so long, that
anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise; but, the truth
is, that I am waiting for my lord and master.
E.,’ I often say, ‘rather you than I.—I do not
know what would become of my crayons and my instrument, if I had half
so many applicants.’—Bad enough as it is, for I absolutely neglect them
both to an unpardonable degree.—I believe I have not played a bar this
fortnight.—However, he is coming, I assure you: yes, indeed, on purpose
to wait on you all.” And putting up her hand to screen her words from
Emma—“A congratulatory visit, you know.—Oh! yes, quite indispensable.”

Miss Bates looked about her, so happily—!

“He promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himself from
Knightley; but he and Knightley are shut up together in deep
consultation.—Mr.
What a thinking brain you
have!
Elton made his appearance.
His civilities to the other ladies must be paid; but his subsequent
object was to lament over himself for the heat he was suffering, and
the walk he had had for nothing.

“When I got to Donwell,” said he, “Knightley could not be found.
Very
odd! very unaccountable! after the note I sent him this morning, and
the message he returned, that he should certainly be at home till one.”

“Donwell!” cried his wife.—“My dear Mr.
I have nothing to do with William’s wants, but it
really is of very great importance that _I_ should see Knightley
to-day; and it becomes a matter, therefore, of very serious
inconvenience that I should have had this hot walk to no purpose.”

Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly.
She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Fairfax determined to
attend her out of the room, to go with her even downstairs; it gave her
an opportunity which she immediately made use of, to say,

“It is as well, perhaps, that I have not had the possibility.
Had you
not been surrounded by other friends, I might have been tempted to
introduce a subject, to ask questions, to speak more openly than might
have been strictly correct.—I feel that I should certainly have been
impertinent.”

“Oh!” cried Jane, with a blush and an hesitation which Emma thought
infinitely more becoming to her than all the elegance of all her usual
composure—“there would have been no danger.
The danger would have been
of my wearying you.
You could not have gratified me more than by
expressing an interest—.
Campbell.”

“Nothing can be actually settled yet, perhaps,” replied Emma,
smiling—“but, excuse me, it must be thought of.”

The smile was returned as Jane answered,

“You are very right; it has been thought of.
And I will own to you, (I
am sure it will be safe), that so far as our living with Mr.
There must be three months, at least, of
deep mourning; but when they are over, I imagine there will be nothing
more to wait for.”

“Thank you, thank you.—This is just what I wanted to be assured of.—Oh!
if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided and
open!—Good-bye, good-bye.”




CHAPTER XVII


Mrs.
Weston might be growing older ten years
hence—to have his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense,
the freaks and the fancies of a child never banished from home; and
Mrs.
Knightley, “she will indulge her even more than
she did you, and believe that she does not indulge her at all.
I doubt
whether my own sense would have corrected me without it.”

“Do you?—I have no doubt.
You must have done well.
And if poor little Anna Weston is to be
spoiled, it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for her
as you have done for me, except falling in love with her when she is
thirteen.”

“How often, when you were a girl, have you said to me, with one of your
saucy looks—‘Mr.
I did it because I thought it would offend you; but, as
you made no objection, I never did it again.”

“And cannot you call me ‘George’ now?”

“Impossible!—I never can call you any thing but ‘Mr.
She was aware herself, that, parting under any other
circumstances, they certainly should have corresponded more, and that
her intelligence would not have rested, as it now almost wholly did, on
Isabella’s letters.
The pain of being
obliged to practise concealment towards him, was very little inferior
to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy.
Emma’s comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on, by Harriet’s
being to stay longer; her fortnight was likely to be a month at least.
John Knightley were to come down in August, and she was
invited to remain till they could bring her back.

“John does not even mention your friend,” said Mr.
But I am not afraid of your seeing what he writes.”

“He writes like a sensible man,” replied Emma, when she had read the
letter. “I honour his sincerity.
He will think all the happiness, all the
advantage, on your side of the question; all the merit on mine.
I am amused by one part of John’s letter—did you
notice it?—where he says, that my information did not take him wholly
by surprize, that he was rather in expectation of hearing something of
the kind.”

“If I understand your brother, he only means so far as your having some
thoughts of marrying.
What has he been judging by?—I am not conscious of any
difference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare him at this
time for my marrying any more than at another.—But it was so, I
suppose.
I remember one evening the poor boys saying, ‘Uncle seems
always tired now.’”

The time was coming when the news must spread farther, and other
persons’ reception of it tried.
Weston was sufficiently
recovered to admit Mr.
Weston, best in the world.
Mr.
Weston was ready, on the first meeting, to
consider the subject in the most serviceable light—first, as a settled,
and, secondly, as a good one—well aware of the nearly equal importance
of the two recommendations to Mr.
Mrs.
Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings in all that she
said to him in favour of the event.—She had been extremely surprized,
never more so, than when Emma first opened the affair to her; but she
saw in it only increase of happiness to all, and had no scruple in
urging him to the utmost.—She had such a regard for Mr.
Knightley, as
to think he deserved even her dearest Emma; and it was in every respect
so proper, suitable, and unexceptionable a connexion, and in one
respect, one point of the highest importance, so peculiarly eligible,
so singularly fortunate, that now it seemed as if Emma could not safely
have attached herself to any other creature, and that she had herself
been the stupidest of beings in not having thought of it, and wished it
long ago.—How very few of those men in a rank of life to address Emma
would have renounced their own home for Hartfield!
It was
all right, all open, all equal.
It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself, and
without one real, rational difficulty to oppose or delay it.
It was no more than the principals were prepared for; they
had calculated from the time of its being known at Randalls, how soon
it would be over Highbury; and were thinking of themselves, as the
evening wonder in many a family circle, with great sagacity.
In general, it was a very well approved match.
One set might recommend
their all removing to Donwell, and leaving Hartfield for the John
Knightleys; and another might predict disagreements among their
servants; but yet, upon the whole, there was no serious objection
raised, except in one habitation, the Vicarage.—There, the surprize was
not softened by any satisfaction.
Oh! no;
there would be a Mrs.
Knightley; “I have it from Robert
Martin himself.
It seems an impossibility!—You cannot mean to say,
that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin.
Knightley, with smiling but
determined decision, “and been accepted.”

“Good God!” she cried.—“Well!”—Then having recourse to her workbasket,
in excuse for leaning down her face, and concealing all the exquisite
feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she must be
expressing, she added, “Well, now tell me every thing; make this
intelligible to me.
How, where, when?—Let me know it all.
The party was to be
our brother and sister, Henry, John—and Miss Smith.
She must wait a moment, or he would think her mad.
I
could suppose she might in time—but can she already?—Did not you
misunderstand him?—You were both talking of other things; of business,
shows of cattle, or new drills—and might not you, in the confusion of
so many subjects, mistake him?—It was not Harriet’s hand that he was
certain of—it was the dimensions of some famous ox.”

The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr.
Knightley and
Robert Martin was, at this moment, so strong to Emma’s feelings, and so
strong was the recollection of all that had so recently passed on
Harriet’s side, so fresh the sound of those words, spoken with such
emphasis, “No, I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin,”
that she was really expecting the intelligence to prove, in some
measure, premature.
Goddard to whom he could apply for information of
her relations or friends.
Could I mention any thing more fit to be
done, than to go to Mrs.
I assured him that I could not.
Sometimes, indeed, I have thought you were half suspecting me of
pleading poor Martin’s cause, which was never the case; but, from all
my observations, I am convinced of her being an artless, amiable girl,
with very good notions, very seriously good principles, and placing her
happiness in the affections and utility of domestic life.—Much of this,
I have no doubt, she may thank you for.”

“Me!” cried Emma, shaking her head.—“Ah! poor Harriet!”

She checked herself, however, and submitted quietly to a little more
praise than she deserved.
She was in dancing, singing, exclaiming spirits; and till
she had moved about, and talked to herself, and laughed and reflected,
she could be fit for nothing rational.
The joy, the gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sensations may be
imagined.
She must laugh at such a close!
The disguise, equivocation, mystery, so hateful to her to
practise, might soon be over.
Weston would be
disappointed.
Woodhouse received the thanks for
coming, which he asked for, when a glimpse was caught through the
blind, of two figures passing near the window.

“It is Frank and Miss Fairfax,” said Mrs.
He stays till to-morrow, and Miss Fairfax has been persuaded to spend
the day with us.—They are coming in, I hope.”

In half a minute they were in the room.
Weston’s letters.
I am
particularly glad to see and shake hands with you—and to give you joy
in person.”

He thanked her with all his heart, and continued some time to speak
with serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness.

“Is not she looking well?” said he, turning his eyes towards Jane.
“Better than she ever used to do?—You see how my father and Mrs.
I was once very near—and I wish I had—it
would have been better.
Knightley is well?” He paused.—She coloured and
laughed.—“I know you saw my letter, and think you may remember my wish
in your favour.
It is a most
uncommon complexion, with her dark eye-lashes and hair—a most
distinguishing complexion!
Look
at her.
Is not she an angel in every gesture?
Observe the turn of her
throat.
I
am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head.
Weston giving an account
of a little alarm she had been under, the evening before, from the
infant’s appearing not quite well.
Perry?—Has he been here this morning?—And how does he travel now?—Has
he set up his carriage?”

Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and while she joined in the
laugh, it was evident from Jane’s countenance that she too was really
hearing him, though trying to seem deaf.

“Such an extraordinary dream of mine!” he cried. “I can never think of
it without laughing.—She hears us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse.
Do
not you see that, at this instant, the very passage of her own letter,
which sent me the report, is passing under her eye—that the whole
blunder is spread before her—that she can attend to nothing else,
though pretending to listen to the others?”

Jane was forced to smile completely, for a moment; and the smile partly
remained as she turned towards him, and said in a conscious, low, yet
steady voice,

“How you can bear such recollections, is astonishing to me!—They _will_
sometimes obtrude—but how you can court them!”

He had a great deal to say in return, and very entertainingly; but
Emma’s feelings were chiefly with Jane, in the argument; and on leaving
Randalls, and falling naturally into a comparison of the two men, she
felt, that pleased as she had been to see Frank Churchill, and really
regarding him as she did with friendship, she had never been more
sensible of Mr.
She proved to
be the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford her the
comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers, and decent enough to
have always wished for concealment.—Such was the blood of gentility
which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for!—It was likely to be
as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a gentleman: but what a
connexion had she been preparing for Mr.
Before the end of September, Emma attended Harriet to church, and saw
her hand bestowed on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction, as
no remembrances, even connected with Mr.
Knightleys, that when once the event were
over, his distress would be soon over too, she hesitated—she could not
proceed.
Other poultry-yards in the
neighbourhood also suffered.—Pilfering was _housebreaking_ to Mr.
The strength, resolution, and presence of mind of
the Mr.
Knightley and Miss Woodhouse.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties.
If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D.
Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change.
The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever.
Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4.
However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.
LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.
Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


